welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday life
I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at
Stanford school of medicine today my
guest is Dr Peter attia his second time
on the podcast Dr Peter attia is a
medical doctor who did his training at
Stanford School of Medicine Johns
Hopkins school of medicine and the
National Institutes of Health he is a
world expert in all things related to
health span vitality and longevity in
this episode we focused on many topics
focusing mainly however on health span
and Longevity and mental health health
Spin and longevity of course relate to
how long one lives and Dr Atia goes
systematically through the seven major
causes of death worldwide beginning with
cardiovascular disease and cerebral
vascular disease also cancer also
accident related deaths dementia deaths
of Despair and in every case explains
the three or four major levers that one
can employ in order to offset that is to
prevent those major causes of death what
follows is an incredibly informative and
actionable set of tools for anyone male
female young or old he explains the
behavioral nutritional supplementation
based and prescription drug-based
approaches that one can use in order to
extend health span and Longevity Dr ATI
explains the key tests and markers that
we should all pay attention to if our
goal is to extend our health span and
how to do so while maximizing our
Vitality this is something that not a
lot of people think about when they
think about health Spin and Longevity
but as Dr Atia illustrates for us
emotional health has everything to do
with our physical health and vice versa
and he shares quite openly about his own
experiences in pursuing ways to improve
emotional health and thereby Health span
lifespan and vitality Dr Atia is quite
open about his own experiences exploring
different practices to improve emotional
health as ways not just to improve
health span longevity and vitality but
of course also to derive the most
meaning and satisfaction from Life
throughout today's discussion we also
discussed Dr atia's newly released book
which is entitled outlive the science
and art of longevity this is a
phenomenal book I've read it cover to
cover now three times I have extensive
notes written throughout and the Book of
course focuses on longevity and health
span and also has an extensive section
on emotional health it gets quite
detailed into Dr Tia's personal
experiences with emotional health and
tools to improve emotional health that
are very actionable for anybody to use I
think the best way for me to summarize
my feelings about the book would simply
be to read the back jacket quote which I
provided so I read quote finally there
is a modern thorough clear and
actionable manual for how to maximize
our immediate and long-term Health
firmly grounded in data and real life
conditions this is the most accurate and
Comprehensive Health guide published to
date outlive is not just informative it
is important and indeed outlive is an
important book as is the discussion that
Dr Tia so graciously provided Us in
today's episode outlive is released on
March 28 2023 and is available for
pre-order prior to that date you can
find a link to where it's sold in the
show note captions before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep
eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers
with cooling Heating and sleep tracking
capacity
as I've talked about before on the
huberman Lab podcast there is a critical
relationship between sleep and body
temperature that is in order to fall
asleep and stay deeply asleep your body
temperature needs to drop by about one
to three degrees and in order to wake up
in the morning and feel alert your body
temperature needs to increase by about
one to three degrees the problem with
most people's sleeping environment is
that even if you make the room cool the
actual environment that you sleep on
that is your mattress and underneath
your covers is hard to regulate in terms
of temperature with eight sleep
regulating the temperature of that
sleeping environment becomes incredibly
easy in fact you can change the
temperature of that environment across
the night making it a little bit cool at
the beginning of the night even cooler
still a few hours into your sleep which
really helps getting into very deep
sleep and then warming it as you
approach morning so that you wake up
feeling most alert I've been sleeping on
an eight-sleep mattress cover for over a
year now and it is completely
transformed my sleep if you'd like to
try eight sleep you can go to
eightsleep.com huberman to to save up to
150 off their pod 3 cover eight sleep
currently ships in the USA Canada UK
select countries in the EU and Australia
again that's eightsleep.com huberman
today's episode is also brought To Us by
element element is an electrolyte drink
that has everything you need and nothing
you don't that means plenty of salt
magnesium and potassium and no sugar the
electrolytes salt magnesium and
potassium are critical for the function
of all cells in particular neurons or
nerve cells and of course proper
hydration is critical for mental
functioning and physical performance to
ensure that I stay hydrated I consume
one packet of element in approximately
20 to 30 ounces of water every morning
when I first wake up and I will also
consume one element packet in about the
same amount of water when I exercise or
when I'm doing any kind of mental work
you know preparing for a podcast writing
grants working on papers and so forth I
find that allows me to maintain my focus
and physical performance at levels that
I just simply can't otherwise if you'd
like to try element you can go to to
drink element that's lmnt.com huberman
to claim a free element sample pack with
your purchase again that's drink element
lmnt.com huberman today's episode is
also brought To Us by hvmn Ketone IQ
hvmn Ketone IQ is a supplement that
increases blood ketones I want to be
clear that I am not following a
ketogenic diet most people fall into
this category they are not following a
ketogenic diet they are omnivores and
they do eat carbohydrates so their
standard fuel source for the brain and
body is not ketones however I found that
by taking Ketone IQ which we know
increases blood ketones I can achieve
much better focus for longer periods of
time for any kind of cognitive work and
much greater energy levels for exercise
especially if I'm going into that
exercise fasted and find myself a little
bit hungry when I start that exercise
this is no surprise we know that ketones
are the brains and body's preferred fuel
source even if you're not following a
ketogenic diet so in other words I Ai
and many other people are now starting
to leverage endogenous ketones as a fuel
source for the brain and body and yet we
are not following a ketogenic diet and
of course if you are following a
ketogenic diet Ketone IQ will further
allow you to increase your blood ketones
as a source of brain and body fuel if
you'd like to try Ketone IQ you can go
to hvmn.com huberman to save 20 off your
order again that's hvmn.com huberman the
huberman Lab podcast is now partnered
with momentous supplements to find the
supplements we discussed on the huberman
Lab podcast you can go to live momentous
spelled ous live momentous.com huberman
and I should just mention that the
library of those supplements is
constantly expanding again that's
livemomentis.com huberman and now for my
discussion with Dr Peter attia Dr Atiya
Peter welcome back
thanks man good to be back and sounding
better this time
looking forward to talking about a
number of important topics with you that
you cover in your book
maybe we could start off by trying to
set the frame for what people should be
thinking about in terms of Vitality and
especially longevity
so I mean I think you
um have to be mindful of how you define
these terms and I'm not going to suggest
that the way I Define them is the only
way or necessarily the best way but I
think from a clinical perspective it's
the way that makes the most sense to me
having thought about this for the better
part of a decade
so it involves some bifurcation between
lifespan and health span lifespan is
very easy for people to understand it is
binary you are alive or you are not
alive
and uh clearly part of longevity is
about how long you live now I think for
a lot of people that tends to be where
the discussion ends that tends to be the
focus of it right it's sort of like you
know longevity somehow implies living
for you know 100 years 120 or some
something like to that extent we talk a
lot about maximum lifespan
um even in laboratory experiments with
mice that's sort of one of the metrics
that's that's discussed is what's what's
maximal lifespan of the animals
um but there's an equally if not
slightly I think potentially more
important part of longevity which is
Health span and healthspan is squishier
and
I think it requires some definition now
the the medical definition of Health
span is the period of time uh by which
you are free from disability and disease
uh I find that to be a not particularly
helpful definition
because by that definition you and I
have the same Health span today that we
did
30 years ago but I know you pretty well
you know me pretty well 30 years ago we
were Twice The Men We are now based on
what we believe our health span is right
in terms of our cognitive function our
physical performance and things like
that so
you know I've clearly experienced the
deterioration of my physical function as
I'm sure you have going back to when you
were a teenager late teenage early 20s
and I think that needs to be captured
somehow in health span so
the way I think of Health span really is
along these three dimensions physical
cognitive and emotional again not
necessarily suggesting that that's the
only way to do it but I do think that
clinically it makes the most sense
and so therefore anything that
really becomes a question of longevity
has to address all of these issues
lifespan
physical health beyond that of just
straight up disability and disease
cognitive Health independent of and
separate from pathology such as dementia
and emotional health which of course is
by far the most complicated of all of
these because we have no biomarkers for
it we have no you know it's not like you
can get a scan on somebody and determine
the state of this
um but nevertheless it's it's important
right and it dramatically factors into
quality of life so with all of that in
mind
what are the major exit points for
people along the lifespan route
so start with the the binary one dead or
alive yeah right I think most everyone
who's healthy would like to be alive
rather than dead so what are the typical
ways that people exit from alive to dead
and uh how can people stay on the uh
freeway of life so to speak so this is
again a great analysis we internally in
our practice call this the death bar
analysis and it's a surprisingly trivial
analysis that I'm just surprised the
death bars aren't plastered front and
center on every doctor's office
so if you simply just look at Actuarial
data which are readily available through
the CDC and do a little bit of data you
know manipulation and Analysis you can
pretty quickly realize what the horsemen
of death are because there's largely
speaking kind of Four Horsemen of death
um the first and most consequential in
terms of the numbers is the diseases of
atherosclerosis so that's
um cardiovascular disease being the
Lion's Share of that but also
cerebrovascular disease so anything that
has to do with atherosclerosis Rises to
the top now that's that's true in the
United States but it's even more true
outside of the United States it's even
more true globally so in other words
when you look at the relative difference
between the number one cause of death in
the U.S and number two which is cancer
um The Gap is actually smaller in the
U.S than globally globally it's enormous
we're talking about 18 to 19 million
people a year that are dying of
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
in the world
whereas number two is cancer at about 11
million
how does the number change when you
include
um cerebrovascular disease yeah it adds
it adds a bit to it um cerebrovascular
disease has there's largely speaking you
can die sort of through embolic events
which are the majority of them they're
just playing for people at what embolic
events are yeah so taking a step back
with like what what does the brain need
more than anything it needs blood flow
anything that interrupts blood flow to
the brain that results in ischemia is uh
devastating and it's devastating in a
more readily you know readily apparent
fashion than virtually any other organ
um so one way that that can happen is if
a clot or disruption of blood flow
occurs through obstruction of blood flow
so so that can occur through a clot so
for example this person has atrial
fibrillation and a blood clot gets
festering in the right atrium and they
happen to have a hole in between the you
know atria of their hearts called a
patent frame in a valley and a clot goes
from right to left it can make its way
up into the arterial circular and and
happen that way where you include blood
flow the much more common way it occurs
is the same way it occurs in the heart
which is you have plaque buildup and
that plaque becomes unstable that plaque
ruptures and the rupture of that plaque
results in an immediate attempt by the
body to fix the problem but in doing so
it walls off the artery meaning the
blood flow distal to that point so that
you know now blood is acutely being
robbed of that
however there are other ways that people
can have this problem and so you have
the whole hemorrhagic side of this so
you can have blood vessels that you know
small blood vessels in the brain that
will rupture as a result of high blood
pressure for example so hypertension
factors both into both sides of this
equation
um both in the heart and in the brain
the majority of these are embolic
however so
don't quote me on this exactly but call
it four five to one Strokes result from
an embolic phenomenon as opposed to a
hemorrhagic phenomenon a bleeding
phenomenon I don't want to take us too
far off on a tangent but as long as
we're here talking about bleeds versus
clots what are some of the major risks
for bleeds I mean I know some people out
there have genetic predispositions for
being bleeders as they're sometimes
called or clutter so things like uh
Factor five Leiden mutations which can
be exacerbated in women for instance by
taking a certain oral contraceptives I
mean and there's a huge lists if people
are interested in them they can look up
you know what are the factors uh
controlling uh bleeding and predisposed
people to be in clutter but for the
typical person out there who feels
healthy
um but might do well to know whether or
not they are predisposed to be a bleeder
or a clotter
um what what sorts of things rise to the
top of that list and that people might
want to check into well I mean there
might be sort of two different things
going on in that question but I think if
your question is when we look at the
subset of people who are at highest risk
for hemorrhagic Strokes the far more
germane question is not underlying
coagulopathy the far more germane
question really comes down to blood
pressure blood pressure would be the
first second and the third driver of
that so hypertension is hands down the
leading driver of hemorrhagic stroke
phenomenon okay so I'll just briefly
interrupt and ask
um since sometimes your recommendations
deviate from the the standards that one
would find online or in the typical
doctor's office at what point do you get
concerned well I actually find myself uh
quite in line with the most recent
available data on blood pressure and
this has been
um obviously the topic that's of high
concern to any Doctor Who's taking care
of patients who even pays a fraction of
attention to the available literature
which is that basically with each
subsequent blood pressure trial the data
are becoming clearer and clearer that
the more aggressively you manage blood
pressure to be within the 120 over 80
range the better so you know there's a
recent study that even looked at going
from what used to be considered
acceptable which was 130 to 135 over 80
to 85. we used to basically say that's
kind of the first level of hypertension
and we would say well
you know do you really need to be better
than that and the answer turns out to be
yes you do if you want to reduce heart
attacks and strokes be it's better to be
120 over 80 than 135 over 85. now this
is a whole other rabbit hole that we
don't need to go down but it's a total
Obsession of mine which is how do you
measure a person's blood pressure I
think this is potentially
I'd have to give it thought but honestly
I could say top three under diagnosed
fixable problems in the United States
today and probably globally in other
words there are too many people walking
around with high blood pressure who
don't know it
um and I think part of the problem is
it's something that is mostly done in
the doctor's office and the readings
that you get in the doctor's office can
be often misleading you've heard this
phenomenon of white coat hypertension so
you go to the doctor
your blood pressure is virtually never
measured correctly in the doctor's
office that cuff they put on and that
yeah the squeeze bulb yeah if you look
at the rigor with which you need to
measure a person's blood pressure the
right way to do it is the person has to
be sitting like this for five minutes
doing nothing okay folks so when you go
to the doctors now you don't let them
take their blood pressure sitting for
five minutes and that doesn't include in
the waiting room because when you get up
and walk over right okay so make them
stand there right so you you want to be
sitting there like this
um a manual cuff is better than an
automated cuff but not enough people use
manual blood pressure so a manual blood
pressure means they put a cuff on you
and they actually put a stethoscope on
the brachial artery and they're you know
using the human ear to listen which
believe it or not you would think a
machine is better but it's not the
machine can be misled by different
sounds now I don't want to suggest that
automated cuffs are useless they're not
but when an automated cuff gives you an
answer that is
you know potentially suspect always back
it up with a manual I'm pretty
Relentless about checking my blood
pressure and
um so I'll do side to side manual versus
automated every day and and there's
easily a 10 to 15 Point difference
between them
maybe this is a silly question but can
people check their own blood pressure
uh meaning manually yeah just could it
could I get it get a coffee in the mold
and learn how to do it yeah I think so I
mean I can do it but honestly I usually
have my wife do it she's a nurse
um but it's not rocket science to check
blood pressure I guarantee you there's a
great video on YouTube that explains the
physiology of it and if you're willing
to splurge on a good enough stethoscope
and Catholic the cuff I have is really
easy to use like it's once you put it on
you know it's in a single thing I'm
squeezing the bulb and looking at the
pressure gauge while I've got the you
know
stethoscope on my artery I mean given
the importance of blood pressure and
this arteriosclerosis being at the top
of the list of risks for
um dying
um it seems to me it might be worth the
expense what what's a typical range of
costs for for the quality I I don't it's
not it's not an ordinance like I feel
like my blood pressure cuff is 40 bucks
um and the stethoscope is a couple
hundred bucks if you're getting a good
one and
um you know good automated cuff there's
I I have no affiliation with any of
these companies I use a I use two
automated cuffs one's called Withings
and the other one's made by a company
called Omron Omron and they're both
decent but again they tend to run high
and I have yet to find a credible
explanation from cardiologists as to why
everybody acknowledges that the manual
one when done correctly is the answer
but I've heard wonky answers about why
automated ones are sometimes Incorrect
and again it's just made me realize
we're not checking blood pressure often
enough on people we're overly relying on
blood pressures in the doctor's office
which are not being done correctly so we
basically have our patients do this
relentlessly so how often let's say
someone buys this because I think for
240 dollars I mean I realize that's
prohibitive for some people but given
the cost of some of the other things
that are discussed on this and many
other podcasts first of all I would just
have people start with an automated cuff
to begin with and start with there
um we generally have people do it for
two weeks you know we give our patients
a little spreadsheet that automatically
calculates averages and stuff like that
tells them what to record and where and
we just say look for two weeks we want
to see two recordings a day
and you know doing morning and an
afternoon slash PM recording twice a day
for two weeks and um let us see those
numbers and we'll scrutinize them
further and if those numbers come in
fine
let's revisit in a year will a day ever
come when a watch or a wristband can do
this really well so
um I hope so and I'm investigating it I
I'm actually going to be trying one out
in a couple of weeks with a company that
I tried two years ago two years ago when
I tried it I was not impressed so I kind
of punted on it
um the company which I guess I'll not
share the name of the company just yet
but they they claim that it's
significantly better so I'm going to put
it to the test again and it's basically
a continuous monitor so it it's a wrist
device that about every 15 minutes
throughout the course of the day will
check your blood pressure
um to me this would be
I honestly probably more important you
know you know how much emphasis I place
on CGM as a great thing to be able to
test glucose monitor right I would argue
this would be more important when the
day comes that we can continuously
assess people's blood pressure
um it would be an integral part of a
person's you know Health checkup once a
year is do two weeks of continuous blood
pressure monitoring right now to do that
which I've done as well is so cumbersome
that it borders on absurd you actually
have to wear a blood pressure cuff that
is attached to a clumsy device that goes
through the whole insufflation exercise
every 15 minutes including while you're
sleeping you know it provides some
insight but it's so disruptive that it's
not what we really want what we the
dream would be like a patch that you
could put I don't know over your chest
that can somehow impute changes in blood
flow or something like that and regulate
but
um we'll see you know between Optical
sensors and things like that I hope that
we're getting closer to having something
so I don't want a stroke I don't want to
bleed in the brain
um I don't want to clot as long as we're
at this number one on the list actually
there's sclerosis being the number one
killer
what are the major ways to prevent it
yeah so there's three big ones that
stand out you know top and center and
then there's kind of a fourth one that I
think is the the foundational piece so
the three big ones we've talked about
one blood pressure so if your blood
pressure is 120 over 80 or better
that's important
the second is not smoking so it turns
out that smoking and blood pressure are
both devastating for arteries uh but for
different reasons right so smoking is
devastating from a chemical perspective
so it's completely irritating to the
endothelium so the endothelium as you
know is the Single Cell lining that is
the innermost part of the arterial and
arterial wall so this is a pretty
special organ
um again it's it's a bit naive but
understandable that people just think of
arteries as tubes they're much more
complicated than that they have many
layers to them but this particular layer
is unusually important it has an
outsized importance because it is the
one that's in contact with the luminal
side right where the blood is flowing in
the tube and anything that injures that
has significant consequences so smoking
is irritating to that in a chemical way
and blood pressure is irritating to that
in a mechanical way so
those two things basically you just want
to that's the low hanging fruit in my
world right you just don't want to have
those things causing irritation to the
endothelium because that renders you now
susceptible to the third factor which is
APO B bearing lipoproteins I want to
talk about apob
um in depth but as long as don't smoke
is the second recommendation on the list
uh can we better Define
um smoking uh and what's being smoked so
assume nicotine for um what about
cannabis and what about vaping of
nicotine and cannabis because vaping has
become so much more common yeah it's a
great question and it's sadly something
we don't have a great answer for so I
can certainly tell you that there's no
reason to believe that smoking cannabis
is somehow better than smoking
cigarettes
but the dose seems to be significantly
lower in other words
you know let's consider a person who
smokes a pack a day for 20 years we call
that a 20-pack year smoker someone who
smokes two packs a day for 15 years is a
30-pack year smoker that's a person
who's dramatically increased their risk
of many cancers including lung cancer
and also their risk of cardiovascular
and cerebrovascular disease again I'm
not a I'm not a THC guy so I don't I
can't necessarily speak for the habits
of people that are smoking marijuana
can't imagine they're smoking that much
probably not yeah so so while on an on a
joint to cigarette basis they're
probably equivalent in terms of harm
it I don't know let's say a person
smokes a joint a day that would be like
smoking a cigarette a day you know
that's a 20th of a pack again I don't
want to say that there's no downside to
that but it it's probably significantly
less so I don't I don't think the risk
fully tracks
I think the same is probably true for
vaping and I want to be clear like
I don't think vaping is a good idea my
you know the last time I looked at the
data on this it was surprisingly sparse
but to me
the only Advantage I could see to vaping
was if it was the only way a person
would stop smoking so there was you know
I sort of looked at it as
it was the definitely the lesser of two
evils but
the by far the better scenario was not
to do any of these things if if nicotine
is what you're after there are better
ways to get nicotine for example through
lozenges and gum and things like that so
that you shouldn't be turning to those
things to to do it but but if it was
like if gum is here and cigarettes are
here you know vaping was probably here
but boy I don't know for those listening
uh uh Peter spaced his hands far apart
for
um gum and smoking and put vaping about
a third of the way be uh from gum uh
toward uh smoking in other words vaping
isn't good for you but it's not as bad
as smoking that would be my that would
be my I mean do you have a you've
probably looked into this as well yeah
we did an episode on nicotine I did an
episode on cannabis and um you know the
discussion around cannabis gets a little
contentious for reasons that aren't um
important it's kind of funny people the
moment
someone starts to confront cannabis as a
potential Health harm people say it's
not as nearly as bad as alcohol which is
a crazy argument right getting hit by a
boss isn't nearly as bad as getting hit
by a motorcycle in most cases but
sometimes you know so that's just kind
of silly yeah
um and clearly cannabis has medical
applications yeah clear clearly
um and then it becomes an issue of the
ratio of THC to CBD pure CBD form is
actually being quite effective for the
treatment of certain forms of epilepsy
so-called Charlotte's Web that's
actually what it's called
um
very high THC containing cannabis
clearly predisposes especially young
males to later on set psychosis those
data are starting to become clear clear
enough to me anyway that people ought to
be aware of them at least and maybe make
decisions on the basis of those when it
comes to the smoking versus vaping it's
just very very apparent that the
chemical constituents of The Vape
and what people are inhaling are
terrible for people and are loaded with
carcinogens and a bunch of other stuff
many of which cross the blood-brain
barrier so that's what worries me the
most you know obviously I'm not a
clinician but anytime I hear about small
molecules you know these small inorganic
molecules getting across the ball being
buried and then being maintained in
neurons for many many years I worry
because the experiment is ongoing mostly
in young people so anyway without going
too far down that track I I think if
people can avoid smoking and vaping they
should and as you mentioned there are
other delivery devices for nicotine and
cannabis tinctures and patches and gums
and things that Edibles that
um if people choose to use those
substances yeah I think I think
sometimes people would benefit to to
imagine what the surface area of the
lung is right if you took the alveolar
air sacs of the lungs and spread them
out you would easily cover a tennis
court remarkable so so yeah just think
about anytime you inhale something you
are exposing your body is so Adept at
absorbing it I mean we have this
unbelievable system for gas exchange
that was designed for gas exchange and
anytime you're putting something else in
that wig you're doing a really good job
of getting it into your body so be
mindful of what that is
um and that look that applies to to
pollution too I mean the the PM 2.5 data
is pretty good I I think once you so
particulates that are less than 2.5
microns are are getting straight into
the body
um which is like a great argument for
avoiding air pollution right I mean I I
always find it funny not to get off on
this tangent but
to me the most compelling arguments
around cleaner energy have nothing to do
with greenhouse gases they have to do
with air pollution
I promise you more people are dying from
the particulate matters in air that
result from burning coal than are ever
going to die from the CO2 emissions that
result from that it's not it's and I
would argue that's going to be two
orders of magnitude it's not even in the
same zip code it makes sense during the
fires I would seem to follow me uh
because when I was in Northern
California there were a bunch of fires
and we were constantly looking I mean
wake up in the morning everything was
covered with Ash my dog was having
trouble breathing I was having trouble
breathing everyone was suffering uh but
there are websites that one can go you
can just look at air pollution yeah and
we tend to only do this during fires and
then you know when I'm in Southern
California there tend to be fires here
so
um you know it's correlation not
causation but
um for sure I didn't set those fires
folks but it's clear that it disrupts
your breathing for a very long period of
time but it's the long tail of that that
we're really talking about here the very
small particulate that we know
firefighters for instance in certain
Industrial workers can end up with that
stuff embedded in their brain tissue for
extremely long periods that's just not
good you make a really interesting point
about
um the the uh the call for cleaner
energy
um can we run that one up to uh
Washington or settle some of the debates
about climate change just by getting
straight to right right I feel like just
bypass all the garbage that's
um that's being spewed back and forth
and just and basically get to the issue
at hand right yeah just just just make
it better for people to not die from the
direct consequence I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge one of our
sponsors athletic greens athletic greens
now called ag-1 is a vitamin mineral
probiotic drink that covers all of your
foundational nutritional needs I've been
taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once are usually
twice a day is that it gets to be in the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health
and those probiotics and athletic greens
are optimal and vital for microbiotic
health in addition athletic greens
contains a number of adaptogens vitamins
and minerals that make sure that all of
my foundational nutritional needs are
met and it tastes great if you'd like to
try athletic greens you can go to
athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll
give you five free travel packs that
make it really easy to mix up athletic
greens while you're on the road in the
car on the plane Etc and they'll give
you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2
again that's athleticgreens.com huberman
to get the five free travel packs and
the year supply of vitamin D3 K2
so
trying to avoid a serious or such a
difficult word to say especially for a
neuroscientist arterial sclerosis did I
get right well it's athero which is
easier because yeah atherosclerosis oh
there yeah I've been making life more
complicated for myself typical of Me
Okay
um so blood pressure keeping it 128 120
over 80 or better don't smoke let's just
throw in don't Vape sure I'm gonna just
plant my flag on it just don't think
there are other ways to get those things
in your system if you really want to get
nicotine or cannabis into your system
APO B
what's the story with APO B okay so to
explain this you have to
tolerate a little bit of chemistry
um so everybody's heard of cholesterol
and uh I I certainly devote quite a bit
of time in the book to explaining this
because it is so important and it's
definitely one of those areas where I
initially received a lot of pushback
from the editor and there was a thought
that hey this is a bit more technical
than it needs to be but I I think that
sometimes you do need to resort to
longer dissertations to dispel mythology
so
cholesterol is a lipid it is a molecule
that the body synthesizes
it is a molecule that is essential for
life so if you cannot synthesize
cholesterol you can't live you you'll
die in utero so there are rare genetic
conditions that prevent the successful
synthesis of cholesterol uh you know
embryos that have those mutations do not
survive
okay so why do we need this stuff so we
need this stuff primarily for two
reasons first it makes up a very
important structural component of cell
membranes
so as you know a cell is a sphere we
look at them and think they're circles
but they're spheres and they're fluid
right they they aren't just like little
perfect you know big bowling balls or
you know balloons they actually morph
and shape and move in these paths and
this is what allows cells to be next to
each other and all sorts of things they
also have channels across all of them
and those channels are held in place by
among other things cholesterol and
phospholipids
the second thing that makes cholesterol
so important it is the precursor to some
of the most important hormones in our
body so our sex hormones testosterone
estrogen progesterone in addition to
glucocorticoids if you look at them it's
really funny you know people if you're
looking at if you Google like give me
the structure of these things you're
kind of like wow they're all basically
the same they all look really similar
and they're all pretty much just
templates of cholesterol so
understandably when it's something
that's that important the body would
leave nothing to chance we make all of
our own cholesterol the cholesterol that
you eat in food largely are relevant
it's a sterified cholesterol so it means
it has an ester side chain it's too
bulky to absorb in the gut so most
cholesterol that you eat in food just
goes out your GI tract
okay so we have this super important
molecule that every cell in the body
makes
but there's a bit of a problem there's
actually two problems the first problem
is not every cell can make as much as it
needs all the time
so you have this demand problem so for
example if you're sick
you're going to need to make far more
glucocorticoids your body's response is
going to be to ramp up cortisol
production to mobilize Fuel and do a
whole bunch of other things and certain
cells like the adrenal glands are going
to be called on to rise to a higher
level of performance and they're not
going to be able to make enough cortisol
so they're going to have to borrow or
take cholesterol from other cells in the
body in fact one of the things we used
to notice in the ICU I never knew why it
was happening
I now know is the few times I would
accidentally order the wrong set of Labs
on a patient in the ICU and also order
like a lipid test or something you would
always notice their cholesterol levels
were dropping
you know serum cholesterol levels
and I now realize why because they were
basically just funneling cholesterol to
the adrenals to make more of the
cortisol that they needed to combat
whatever they were in the ICU for which
is usually the most severe form of you
know stress the body is under so you
have to be able to transport this stuff
and then the second problem is
as you know cholesterol being a lipid is
not water soluble
so
the the most dominant Highway in the
body is the circulatory system we can
use the lymphatic system and things like
that but for the most part we use our
circulatory system as the highway to
move stuff around
and the highway is made up of water
plasma which is which are is the liquid
component of your blood is water
and therefore things that are water
soluble move easily so glucose
sodium
electrolytes all of those things are
dissolvable in water and therefore they
don't need a carrier you just dissolve
them in the water and they can go so
that's why your liver can make glucose
that your brain can easily get and there
doesn't need to be a carrier or an
intermediary or anything like that
but unfortunately with cholesterol being
a lipid we can't do that just as water
and oil don't mix cholesterol and plasma
don't mix so the body had to come up
with a trick and the trick was designing
a vehicle that was water soluble on the
outside
and fat soluble on the inside that you
could bury the cholesterol inside along
with triglycerides
and on the outside it was covered in
protein which is water soluble and
that's the that's the thing that moves
around and that thing is called A
lipoprotein and as its name suggests
it's part lipid part protein lipid on
the inside protein on the outside
and those lipoproteins
um come largely in two different
families
so one family comes from a lineage
called APO B
so the APO B family which is short for
apolipoprotein B100
is a family that is derived from the
liver and each of those lipoproteins has
one and only one apolipoprotein B100 on
it we shorten it and just call it APO B
because we don't really worry about APA
lipoprotein b48 which is a set attached
to chylomicrons that are responsible for
fat absorption in the gut they're very
short-lived They Don't Really factor
into atherosclerosis so we're going to
just for the purists out there there's
an APO b48 we're not going to talk about
it
so when I say APO B what I'm talking
about is a protein that wraps around a
subset of these lipoproteins there's
another family of lipoproteins called
apoa or apolipoprotein a this is a much
more complicated family
and I'm not going to talk about it here
because we're we would take an hour to
just explain how the APO lipoprotein a
family works but I'll I'll again the
punch line is there are many
apolipoprotein A's there's variable
numbers of apoas on those proteins and
they are all part of a family called
high density lipoproteins
back to the APO B guys they are of the
low density lipoprotein lineage so
you've heard the term LDL and HDL what
is it referring to it's basically
referring to the relative concentrations
of protein and lipids in the
lipoproteins and not surprisingly based
on their names the hdls are higher
density more protein less lipid the ldls
low density lipoproteins and vldls very
low density lipoproteins and idl's
intermediate densely lipoproteins are
all lower density which means more lipid
to protein
they're different sizes there's a whole
bunch of other things going on
most important fact in all of this is
that the apobs are atherogenic so what
we're about to talk about next is
perpetuated by lipoproteins that have an
apob on them
so everything in the story right now is
just about how do you
get cholesterol around the body
and these um
proteins that have lipid in the middle
um so let's just take apob for example
um many many billions of them floating
around in our body even in the
healthiest of people
um
and they're being shuttled to tissues
that need them
like the adrenals muscle heart Etc
what sets the demand for these things so
for instance could somebody have
relatively high LDL maybe even higher
than
um sort of high end of chart or even
um above high-end apob but there's some
sort of demand metabolic demand or or
their their weight training a lot or
they're running marathons and so they
need a lot of LDL the reason I asked
this
um is because it's so easy for the
uninformed person
which I include myself in that group to
just stick here oh LDL bad cholesterol
bad apob bad when in fact
um
you very graciously spelled out the fact
that they these things actually perform
a functional role in the healthy body so
before we get into why they are are can
be bad why would you want a low density
like protein what is that doing for
somebody and is there
um any circumstance where the way people
are exercising or thinking or not
sleeping or sleeping too much it's um
that a higher level actually reflects a
healthy metabolic need we don't have any
evidence of that to date
um
all of the functions that I described
can be function can be done by the HDL
so the high density lipoproteins the APO
A's can do all of it so apob and low
density lipoproteins are just
um
they're just the necessary uh we don't
really I mean no we don't understand why
we have them Andrew this is the part
that's really interesting to me
um most species do not even have apob
and as a result of that most species
are chemically incapable of
atherosclerosis so if someone could zero
out their APO B and their LDL we assume
they would function just fine we know
they would because we have certain
people who walk around with genetic
mutations that render them that way
wow furthermore we also know that
there's a bit of a myth out there that
cholesterol the cholesterol you measure
in your blood is essential for brain
health for example it's an
understandable thing right you you can
speak to this very eloquently the role
of cholesterol in the brain yeah I wrote
down when I um was a postdoc at Stanford
um so I always point out I was born in
Stanford training at Stanford works out
probably diet Stanford hopefully a long
time from now you'll tell me how long
we're gonna do the Charlie Munger thing
and make sure that you never go back to
Stanford so that like you can't die
there there exactly we cured already
um
that when I was a postdoc I worked with
a guy named Ben Barris who I know um you
know probably
um as a different person then for
reasons that people can look up Ben's
name
um anyway incredible scientist and but
there was someone in his lab that
discovered that cholesterol
is a critical component of the
synaptogenesis process the form the
formation of connections between neurons
and the developing brain and then that
went on to lead to the discovery of
things like um thrombospondence being
important for synaptogenesis ETC but
cholesterol sits Central in the brain
development mechanisms like you want
cholesterol around for brain development
in fact I think very low fat diets and
very low cholesterol diets during
early development can really impair
brain development as I understand yeah
it's not it's not entirely clear why but
here's what we know when you're born
your serum cholesterol levels are very
low
so children infants and children have
very low levels of cholesterol they
would have
and I should explain one thing that's
important they're not myelinated yet
right I mean they're they're sorry to
interrupt but myelin of course the the
sheathing around uh neuron neuronal
axons which accelerates the propagation
of nerve signals and which is deficient
in things like multiple sclerosis is
essentially fat made up of phospholipid
um and requires cholesterol for
synthesis but but young children are not
very well mildly I mean the spinal cord
is you know so this is what's
interesting right we would all agree
that cholesterol is more important to
infants and children than to anybody
else
right it would be the most important
substrate for CNS development
and yet
infants and children have virtually
unmeasurable levels of cholesterol
it really starts to take off in your
teenage years right so cholesterol
basically serum cholesterol levels rise
basically monotonically throughout life
um women get a big bump at menopause so
it really goes up for them
um
but
what's interesting is how is it how do
we reconcile the fact that infants and
children have really low levels of serum
cholesterol yet clearly undergo CNS
maturation without any problems and it
basically comes down to the following
what you measure in the serum is but a
fraction of the total body pool of
cholesterol so we get a little bit of a
the light under the you know the uh
what's the the you know the the Street
Lamp under the drunk under the drunk
just because we're looking there we tend
to think that that's what we're seeing
but
um if you took the entire circulatory
pool of cholesterol it's about 10 of
your total body cholesterol it's a tiny
fraction of it so it's what we measure
because that's all we have access to but
it really represents virtually none of
it
um I do want to say something because
you mentioned LDL I want to tie this
back to the reader right or The Listener
rather
um
APO B refers to the lipoprotein the
singular lipoprotein wrapped around an
LDL particle
so if you happen to be lucky enough that
your doctor measures an apob level it's
a blood test it says apob X number of
milligrams per deciliter that's
measuring the concentration of that
protein it is a direct measurement of
the concentration of LDL and vldl
particles
when you have a blood test that says LDL
it usually doesn't say LDL it usually
says ldlc or LDL cholesterol because LDL
is not a laboratory measurement LDL
cholesterol is a laboratory measurement
and it's just taking the total number of
LDL particles breaking them apart and
measuring how much cholesterol is in
them
so ldlc measures the total concentration
of cholesterol in the ldls apob measures
the number of them
and they're different but one of them is
far superior at predicting risk in its
apob the number of particles is much
more predictive of risk than the amount
of cholesterol contained within them
fascinating first time I've understood
h-e-l-ldl and these lipoproteins in a
way that makes sense so thank you I'm
sure others feel the same way
what apob
level is your red flag cut off right
um I actually had my apob measured
recently and I'm definitely above the
high end we'll be discussing this over
dinner and
um and just to tie this back
um I hope that's a steak dinner and that
should be fine given the fact that
dietary cholesterol has no direct link
to APO B and that's true but dietary
saturated fat does uh okay so which is
not to say we're not gonna have a steak
right will but not necessarily one of
the fattier cuts
um although probably will be uh for me
um so what's what's the high end that
you uh high-end flag yeah at what point
do you start saying ah we need to do
something and then we'll talk about what
people can do yeah so this is a
complicated question because it depends
on so many factors
the first Factor it depends on is what
is your objective and I do pose this
question directly to a patient right so
I say like we've got this disease that's
the number one cause of death
now you can die with it or you can die
from it
that those are your choices
statistically speaking more people will
die from it than anything else but if
you live long enough we will all die
with it to some extent
so if you're me and I come from a family
history as you know I write about this
in the book where basically every man in
my family except one has died of
atherosclerosis and they have all done
so very prematurely my dad's lost
Brothers in their 40s and 50s
um by some miracle my dad is still alive
at 86 but you know I think that's in
large part because he
at least had the good sense to listen to
doctors and take medication to lower his
cholesterol and blood pressure
um
if your objective is to not die from
heart disease and only to die with it
then you want APO be as low as possible
now how low you go depends on when you
start
because one way to think about this is
it's an area under the curve problem
the longer you wait to start doing
something about this the more
aggressively you need to do something
about it
um
I think a better way to think about this
though is to go back to what we talked
about with smoking
so
would you agree that smoking is causally
related to lung cancer yes so just to be
clear Andrew you do not think that it's
just an association that smokers get
more lung cancer
no I do not you in other words you
believe that smoking causes lung cancer
then yes okay I mean there are a number
of mechanistic steps in between I mean
if somebody was really want to get uh to
you know drill into the logic they could
say okay it's not actually the smoking
it's a you know some uh disruption of
the endothelial cell lining that you
know smoking triggers that that triggers
that I assume so and I agree with you by
the way I think the data are very clear
I'm very relieved here yeah so but but
I'm going someplace very important here
because
if there's one topic that doesn't get
enough attention in medicine it's
causality
and causality is an obsession of mine
like most of the day on some level I sit
around thinking about causality
and I think the hardest part about
studying medicine with respect to human
beings is how difficult it is to infer
causality for most things that we do
so
if you believe that smoking is causally
related
to lung cancer
then smoking cessation reduces the
probability of lung cancer
that is that is a logical equivalency
there can be no debate about that
what if I said to you Andrew this is
going to be our new philosophy around
smoking cessation
I'm going to anoint you the tsar of
smoking cessation so
um if people pick up smoking no problem
we're gonna let him smoke
but we're going to assess their risk for
lung cancer using a model that predicts
when their 10-year risk of lung cancer
gets above a certain level we're going
to recommend that they stop smoking
so we're going to look at their age
their sex their family history some
biomarkers that might help us we're
going to even do scans of their lungs
and once we think they cross a threshold
where their risk of lung cancer is high
enough let's just say it's 25 percent
boom you make them stop you tell them
it's time to stop
is that a logical approach to treating
smoking and lung cancer or would be
better to say
given that we know cigarettes are
causally related to this
how about you never start smoking and
the minute you do we pull the cigarette
out of your mouth and explain to you
that you're doing something that is
causally related of course it would be
the latter not the former it would be
idiotic to suggest that we endorse
smoking until you cross a certain
threshold
well this now becomes the Germaine
question
there is no ambiguity that APO B is
causally related to atherosclerosis
you know how can I tell you that I can
tell you that looking at all of the
clinical trial literature all of the
epidemi epidemiologic literature and
perhaps even most importantly the
mendelian randomizations
all of these things tell us because by
mendelian randomizations meaning genetic
mutants humans out there that make very
little b or excess exactly so we have
the whole gradient so you can say if you
make very little you aren't going to die
as uh quickly in your life as if you
make too much that's right so mendelian
randomization is such an elegant tool
where you basically let genes do the
randomization and as you said there is a
gradation of LDL concentration or apob
concentration that occurs from insanely
low to insanely high and this is a
wildly polygenic polymorphic set of
conditions and we can look at the
outcomes of those people based on the
random sorting of those genes and
there's no ambiguity LDL is causally
related LDL cholesterol or apob causally
related to atherosclerosis
well if that's true and I haven't seen a
credible argument that it's not
there are people who argue that it's not
by the way but they just don't have
credibility in their arguments then
you have to say that what we're doing in
medicine today is very backwards because
what we're doing in medicine today is
the following we're saying
I'm coming at this in a long way but
your question is so important that I
want to answer it this way we're
answering your question today as follows
we're saying
Andrew let's do a 10-year risk
calculation of your risk of Mace May
stands for major adverse cardiac event
it is the metric we use in medicine so a
major adverse cardiac event is a heart
attack stroke you know or death
basically resulting from these things so
and we have calculators that are pretty
good at predicting your 10-year event
risk they'll look at your cholesterol
levels your blood pressure they'll ask
if you smoke they'll ask some family
history questions and they'll spit out a
number
now we should do yours after the fact
um and I don't know if we did it for a
person who's is you know you're in your
mid-40s like it would probably spit out
less than five percent risk for a major
adverse cardiac event in the next 10
years in fact the models don't even work
if age is below 40. so the first time I
went to do one of these tests when I was
in my mid-30s I couldn't do it like the
the algorithm breaks so it's sort of
like you know just doesn't work so the
the implication there is if you're
uh if your mace risk is less than five
percent the thinking is you do not need
to treat LDL or apob
I argue that that makes absolutely no
sense it's just as idiotic as the
analogy I used around smoking
if a risk is causal and it is modifiable
it should be modified regardless of the
risk tail in duration
so then the question becomes to what
level
and again the earlier you start the less
aggressive you need to be the less
damage that's there already so for
example we do CT angiograms on our
patients if the CT angiogram shows no
evidence of calcification no evidence of
soft plaque that means grossly their
coronary arteries are still normal
histologically they're probably not
because nobody probably makes it to our
age with histologically perfect coronary
arteries
you know we might be satisfied with a
person's APO B being at the fifth
percentile of the population which would
be about 60 milligrams per deciliter
but if we have any other factors meaning
we're starting later in life you know or
a person already has gross evidence of
disease calcification soft plaque family
history is significant any other risk
factors are present
I mean we'll we'll treat apob to 30 to
40 milligrams per deciliter which is you
know probably the first percentile and
if somebody's sitting up in the say low
130s
um where does that uh what kind of flag
does that raise for you and I realize
it's highly contextual age Etc no no
it's a huge red flag again
um just because something is causal
doesn't mean it's you're guaranteed to
get it there are smokers who don't get
lung cancer so you know there's going to
be somebody listening to this who says
Mike my grandmother's 95 years old she's
his cholesterol is Sky High and she's
alive and well and I will say absolutely
there are a lot of people walking around
that way just as there are a lot of
smokers walking around who don't get
lung cancer
um
you can't
you can't impute these things on an
individual basis you basically have to
ask the question
um how do I make the best judgment about
an individual from heterogeneous
population data and based on what are
causal and non-causal inferences around
risk so you know to me
if a person has very high APO B and they
do not want to be treated for it
then the best we would do is say let's
at least establish that there are no
other risk factors present and let's at
least do the most investigation we can
around the existing damage and if that
person has a perfect CT angiogram
I'm going to push less hard than if they
have a devastating angiogram and by the
way devastating in my book is just any
amount of calcification or soft plaque
anything that shows up grossly that you
can see on a CT scan means that you've
got a decade plus of really bad
histology building up to it
this uh issue of causality I think now
becomes very clear as to why that is so
crucial and um I really appreciate the
way you spelled that out so let's say
somebody's APO B is
you know 80 100
let's say 130
um for example
what sorts of things can they do to
reduce that number is this always going
to be prescription medication and if so
what are the more common forms of
prescription medication that work best
what are their side of effect profiles
and so on so yeah usually once you want
to start getting down into the 30 to 60
range you're going to require
pharmacotherapy
um but you know usually we want to see
how far we can get with nutrition so
fixing insulin resistance in an insulin
resistant person will will bring this
down right so one of the Hallmarks of
insulin resistance is elevated
triglycerides they haven't we haven't
talked about triglycerides but they they
weren't some attention because
I mentioned it earlier but one of the
other things that the lipoproteins carry
is triglycerides so they're carrying fat
and cholesterol
and if you recall APO B represents the
number of particles so the purpose of
them is to be carrying around mostly
cholesterol but if you have a high
amount of triglyceride you're basically
using up cargo space on the ships
and so you need more ships
so if a person has elevated
triglycerides and I consider anything
over a hundred to be elevated even
though most laboratory tests would
consider normal to be up to 150
milligrams per deciliter
um we would want to fix their insulin
resistance
bring the trigs way down uh I I would
want to see trigs no more than two times
the HDL cholesterol so if they're HDL
cholesterol is you know 60 milligrams
per deciliter I consider 120 to be
through the roof high and ideally we
want trigs at or below HDL cholesterol
so it's being triglycerides that's right
so and uh and that's that's dietary fat
no actually it's most easily
accomplished through carbohydrate
restriction yeah carbohydrate
triglycerides in some ways are kind of
an integral of carbohydrate consumption
um any energy restriction will get it
for you
um but it's most sensitive to
um to restriction of of um even even
under euch caloric conditions
carbohydrate restriction will lower
triglycerides
so again energy restriction would be
kind of first order of business
um but within that carbohydrate
restriction will probably get you there
quicker
so
you know you sort of take the the low
hanging fruit off the table and where
does exercise come um play a role
minimal role for improving insulin
sensitivity no no I'm sorry for
improving uh lipids in general yeah but
it can improve uh absolutely yeah
especially combinations of resistance
training and cardiovascular exercise
correct yeah so once it comes down to
pharmacotherapy
um you basically have several classes of
drugs so the most obvious and the one
that most people are aware of are called
statins so statins work
um both directly and indirectly on the
problem so directly they work by
targeting an enzyme
um very high in the synthetic pathway of
cholesterol production uh an enzyme is
called hmg-coa reductase and I think
it's the second committed step I might I
could be wrong on that it's I don't
think it's the first committed step but
you that that enzyme gets targeted kind
of ubiquitously throughout the body and
in response to that the liver senses a
reduction in the body's pool of
cholesterol and the liver really tries
to regulate this so the liver in
response to that increases its
expression of LDL receptors so the liver
itself has LDL receptors on its surface
and as the body's pool of cholesterol
goes down the liver senses this
reduction and says I want to bring more
cholesterol in more LDL receptors go up
and more apob particles are coming out
of circulation so that's really the
dominant way that they work and in fact
that's kind of a dominant way that all
of these drugs work so another class of
drug is called acetamide it works by
blocking we could get as technical as
you want on this it's called the Neiman
pick C1 like one transporter in the
enterocyte
um I like to explain this I borrowed
this explanation from Tom Dayspring but
the enterocyte is a is obviously the
aluminum gut side cell that is
responsible for absorption of
cholesterol remember I said earlier most
of the cholesterol you eat you don't
absorb the reason you can't absorb it is
an esterified cholesterol molecule
cannot come in the Neiman Pixi one like
one transporter it's too it's physically
too large but the cholesterol that you
synthesize which once it makes its way
back to the liver gets secreted in bile
down the intestine that is unesterified
and readily fits into that transporter
so I kind of described that guy as the
ticket taker at the bar he lets
everybody in as long as they fit through
the door
there's a checkpoint inside the bar that
basically says do we have too much
cholesterol if so spit it out and
there's another door that acts more like
The Bouncer and he's called the ATP
binding cassette G5 G8 and he spits
excess cholesterol out and if that
system is working fine everything is
great but in a lot of people that ATP
binding cassette doesn't work very well
and it can't properly regulate the total
body pool of cholesterol so there's a
drug called acetamide that simply blocks
the ticket taker
are there side effects to statins and
it's edamide acetamide has virtually no
side effects it's a you can think of it
as a drug that's acting outside the body
right it's sort of acting on uh you know
a turnstile door in your gut
um I have seen one patient get uh sort
of loose stools from it that became
enough of an issue that we discontinued
it
um I would say that when zetamide is
combined with a Statin which is very
commonly done
um
it's not unheard of I don't I can't give
you a number but it could be as high as
10 percent that you see an elevation in
transaminases which are enzymes that are
made by the liver in response to some
irritation so
you know this is where I think it's
unclear what the clinical significance
of that is we tend to abort the strategy
in the presence of elevated
transaminases even though the literature
says you don't need to our view is we
have other options why would we tolerate
any inflammation if you don't need to
statins do have side effects so five
percent of people genuinely and
legitimately legitimately get a muscle
soreness that can be debilitating they
can feel like kind of the worst workout
you've ever had that you know like the
day after you've like imagine you hadn't
lifted weights in six months and then
you
you know came over and I made you do the
most brutal workout of your life you
know how you would feel happens every
time I come over here well I work out
often
um but every time I come over to your
house you put me through the most brutal
workout I've ever been through I think
you and cam Haines are the two people
who've managed to put me through
workouts that kept me sore for at least
uh two weeks after each visit so so
that's soreness that imagine you would
have that persisting five percent of
people get that response from a Statin
and obviously that's just non you know
it's a non it's a non it's a non-do
um there's a narrower subset of people
that
um do do get brain fog and do experience
brain frog from statins and we don't
really understand the why there we have
some theories as to why you know maybe
they're
maybe they're getting too much of a
reduction in central cholesterol
synthesis
um again it's a subjective finding but
given that we have so many tools in the
tool kit like we don't have to tolerate
side effects with these drugs anymore
there was a day when
you know you had somebody who just had a
heart attack and they're basically
looking down the barrel of being on a
Statin for the rest of their life and
there were like two of them and they you
know had tons of side effects and it
didn't matter today
while there are probably nine statins
out there there were really only four
that we even use and at least two of
them have such a low side effect profile
they're not as potent but they have a I
mean
potent's a bit of the potent's the wrong
word they don't have the same effect
um but they're very potent because
you're at least one of them you're
taking at such a low dose
um that we've got lots of Statin options
the third side effect of statins which
again not common but can't be ignored is
insulin resistance
so it really and this is one of the I
think one of the benefits of at least
having periodic CGM tracking is we'll
see this you know we had a patient who
happened to be wearing CGM in general
and then we started him on you know 10
milligrams of rezuvastatin which is
probably the Workhorse Statin right now
it's a that's a generic nerve for
Crestor
um
and he pings us like a couple weeks
later and he's like man my glucose is
like 10 points up consistently from
where it has normally been
kind of hummed and hard we
troubleshooted a few things
after two months we're like let's just
stop the Crestor and uh see if that
fixes it and it immediately fixed it so
there was you know we reintroduced the
Crestor and it happened again so there
was no doubt in my mind that you know
we're very low doubt in my mind that
Crestor was responsible for that
um and again you could say well maybe
that's not that clinically significant
but I would argue why bother I have
other choices so those are your two big
ones
um the next one that is really the big
one are pcsk9 Inhibitors so
you know
um gosh we're coming up about 20 years
ago maybe a woman named Helen Hobbs uh
made a discovery of a group of people
that had a disease called familial
hypercholesterolemia so FH or familiar
hypercholesterolemia is a very genetic
heterogeneous condition going back to
that mendelian randomization study these
are the people on the far end that show
us how high lipid levels cause
atherosclerosis so these people have
very high cholesterol levels typically
north of 300 milligrams per deciliter
their LDL cholesterol alone is by
definition at least 190 milligrams per
deciliter
uh very high incidence of
atherosclerosis in these people along
with other sort of injuries like they
accumulate they have so much cholesterol
they accumulated in their tendons in
their eyes I mean it's it's a really
devastating condition if not managed
correctly and she discovered this
mutation in uh a gene for pcsk9 that
codes for a protein that degrades LDL
receptors so these people had hyper
functioning pcsk9 genes so their genes
were just chomping down all the LDL
receptors in the liver so these people
weren't clearing LDL
about five years later another subset of
the population were discovered that
we're the exact opposite these people
had hypofunctioning pcsk9 they had
virtually unmeasurable these people had
LDL cholesterol levels of 10 to 20
milligrams per deciliter and not
surprisingly they had no heart disease
so that led to the development of a
couple of amazing drugs that are now
used so I take one of these drugs I've
been taking one of these drugs for and I
probably started in 2015. so it's an
injectable drug I take it every two
weeks and it's a called a pcsk9
inhibitor so the drug blocks the protein
and therefore gives me more LDL
receptors Yanks more APO B out of
circulation interesting when we were
talking about side effects I
um I was thinking are there any
short-term benefits so I guess we call
this positive side effects but let's
think of it more directly in line with
the underlying biology let's say my APO
B is
um High mid-range to high
you know let's say a hundred um you know
80 to 100.
um and I
improve my insulin resistance through
nutrition but we decide you know it
doesn't go down so much so we're going
to continue to to try and knock this
number down and and I take uh any number
of different drugs to reduce it do I
immediately start to feel better nope so
there's no nothing okay and I think
that's an important
um important point because of the
causality issue that we were talking
about earlier because a lot of people
are walking around out there feeling
fine their apob might be a bit high they
either know it or don't know it but they
think well I'm feeling fine and you gave
a very rational argument earlier as to
why
because of the causality involved it
makes far more sense to intervene yeah
we don't want to rely on feeling when it
comes to atherosclerosis just to put
some perspective on this
when I was in medical school we had a I
think I even write about this in the
book
we had a pathology lecture where the
professor stands up there and he says um
what is the most common presentation of
a heart attack
and you know us Keener first-year Med
students hands shoot straight up chest
pain nope that's not the most common uh
oh uh uh shoulder pain aren't radiating
down the left arm no nausea no shortness
of breath no no no we rattled this off
for a few minutes and he goes death
the single most common presentation for
a myocardial infarction is death more
people now I would say today
that was 25 years ago
today
it's probably not the most common
because
um Advanced cardiac life support is so
much better but it's still strikingly
common
so well you could say that um the the
best predictor of a heart attack is
still a heart attack
um well I'm not saying that the best
underlying predictor yeah but um and
actually this hits home when I was uh
postdoc I was living in San Francisco
and I'll never forget this taking my
coffee and uh out on my porch in the
morning this is right near the UCSF
Parnassus campus and this guy's walking
down the street is probably about my age
and I said hello and he said hello he
walked a few more steps and boom you
just hit the concrete and died right in
front of me it took a minute or two to
know that he was truly dead I'll never
forget it because that's a yeah it's
it's an event right and I followed up on
this and because his family you know the
the whole thing
um because they wanted a report and no
cocaine in his system no prior history
of any kind of health issues and but he
was just strolling along and just boom
as if he'd been hit by a bus it's crazy
so it's I mean again this is just one of
those things where we're gonna we're
gonna spend a lot of time talking about
things that feel good and feel bad when
you change them right like if you take a
person who's not sleeping well but who
thinks they're sleeping well and you ask
them for a leap of faith which is hey
give me a month to help you sleep really
well yeah you're gonna feel better you
might not know it now because you don't
know how bad you're sleeping now you've
become acclimated to this but this is
not one of those domains you know
exercise nutrition sleep all those
things when you do those things better
you feel better but you know I don't
want to over promise on this you're not
going to feel better in the moment when
you fix your lipids but you'll feel
better when you don't have a heart
attack
so by all this logic everybody should
get their APO be measured how early in
life should people do that starting in
their 20s uh in their 30s certainly if
you have a family history that is of any
concern like in ret like if I could live
my life over again knowing if I knew
everything you know then that I know
today yeah I would have had mine
measured in my 20s you know I didn't I
didn't get my APO B measured for the
first time probably till I was in my 40s
because you know that's well yeah maybe
late 30s early 40s right
um I had my first calcium scan when I
was 35 and I had to beg borrow steel to
get it done because everyone was like
why does a 35 year old want to do this
but I something
I just felt something was wrong given my
family history
um and I'm glad I did I'm glad I did
that because I learned something that
that completely changed the direction of
my life okay I know my it will be
numbers and that I might be that guy
who's up in the you know above 100 so
I'm gonna get this treated that's a
promise to myself
I'd like to just take a brief moment and
thank one of our podcast sponsors which
is inside tracker inside tracker is a
personalized nutrition platform that
analyzes data from your blood and DNA to
help you better understand your body and
help you reach your health goals I've
long been a believer in getting regular
blood work done for the simple reason
that blood work is the only way that you
can monitor the markers such as hormone
markers lipids metabolic factors Etc the
impact your immediate and long-term
Health one major challenge with blood
work however is that most of the time it
does not come back with any information
about what to do in order to move the
values for hormones metabolic factors
lipids Etc into the ranges that you want
with inside tracker changing those
values becomes very straightforward
because it has a personalized dashboard
that you can use to address the
nutrition-based behavior-based
supplement-based approaches that you can
use in order to move those values into
the ranges that are optimal for you Your
vitality and your longevity inside
tracker now includes a measurement of
APO lipoprotein B so-called APO B and
they're all plan apob is a key marker of
cardiovascular health and therefore
there's extreme value to knowing your
apob levels if you'd like to try inside
tracker you can go to insidetracker.com
huberman to get 20 off any of inside
tracker's plans again that's inside
tracker.com huberman to get 20 off
we covered
um the three major risk factors which
were blood pressure keeping that in
check don't smoke and APO B and we've
now talked about the things to adjust
apob levels we did not really talk about
things to adjust blood pressure I'm
assuming exercise sits as one of the
exercise nutrition yeah weight weight
management is a huge one here so you
know you take a person who's blood and
this is one of those things where we
don't immediately jump on the
pharmacotherapy train with blood
pressure because here there are side
effects sometimes and you do have to
worry about overshooting
you don't really have to worry about
overshooting a person's lipids we do
back off if we overshoot but it doesn't
cause a symptom there's not a there's
not a short-term immediate risk from
doing that if you overshoot somebody's
blood pressure medication you trade one
problem for another problem they become
lightheaded when they get up to pee at
night they fall and bang their head
that's a devastating consequence totally
unacceptable so our goal is to see how
much we can lower blood pressure without
medication before we turn to medication
and let's be clear the meds today are so
much better than they used to be again
there was a day when the side effects of
these medicines were miserable that's
that's simply not the case today I mean
ACE inhibitors Angiotensin receptor
blockers I mean these things are very
well tolerated especially the arbs
um
so again almost anybody can be on these
things but if we could get a person to
lose 10 pounds and exercise every day we
see great effects with zone two stuff
right so kind of the low intensity
cardio let's end your recommendation
there I know you talk about this in the
book but
I've thrown out numbers about 150 to 180
minutes per week you go a bit higher
yeah we go 180 to 250 240. yeah I'd like
to see three to four hours a week of
zone two
um so that's an important piece and
sleep is an important piece
um so get get the sleep right get the
exercise right if you if you're if
you're over nourished let's correct that
problem and if all of that doesn't work
and by the way that works a lot of the
time now that works most of the time if
that doesn't work then we've got
pharmacotherapy there is still a true
phenomenon of essential hypertension
which is in individuals for whom
all the fixable stuff has been fixed and
they still have high blood pressure we
still have to medicate those folks
by the way there's something that I want
to mention here that doesn't get much
attention but it's so important which is
the effect of high blood pressure on the
kidney and also the brain itself we've
talked about the brain we've talked
about the heart but the kidney doesn't
get enough attention the the kidney is a
remarkable organ and I think if you're
really in this game of trying to live
longer right if you if you think hey you
know maybe we'll live 80 85 years but if
we kind of start doing all of these
other things and and
really optimizing our behaviors that
could be 95.
well you have to start thinking about
the capacity of the kidney and once the
glomerular filtration rate Falls below a
certain level
you have to be very careful with how you
live your life
and unfortunately this is one of those
things that I is is another sort of
mistake that's made in kind of modern
medicine which is we don't pay enough
attention to how to measure kidney
function correctly we rely very heavily
on something called
um creatinine
as opposed to looking at another
biomarker called systatin C Which is far
more accurate and we also tolerate too
low of a kidney function for a person's
age so we look at you know we might look
at someone who's 50 whose kidney
function is at 65 percent
and say you're totally fine because it's
true that at 65 there is no problem but
you're not thinking well if this person
has to live another 40 years and this
continues to go down they're going to
potentially be staring down the barrel
of needing dialysis the last five years
of their life again you don't want you
want to die with compromised kidney
function but never from compromised
kidney function in fact the hazard ratio
of all cause mortality associated with
compromised kidney function is even
greater than that of heart disease
once once you cross that threshold I
mean lights out once you are needing
dialysis
I mean your risk of death is higher than
that of someone with high blood pressure
smoking even someone who has cancer you
have a higher risk of death having
end-stage renal disease than you do
having cancer so
um the kidney is so sensitive to blood
pressure this is a tiny organ that on
every pump of your heart is getting 20
to 25 of your blood
so just imagine how sensitive and
susceptible it is to elevated blood
pressure
we've covered
um
quite a few corners of avoiding the
major killer arthrosclerosis
um let's talk about cancer
nobody wants cancer
everybody seems to know somebody who has
had or has died of cancer and probably
no surprise given that it's number two
on the list what are the numbers and
what
can people do to offset cancer
um and of course can't there are huge
number of different types of cancer
um and inside of this conversation I
just want to um earmark that might be
good to have a conversation about
alcohol which we didn't talk about in
the last um last discussion but
if alcohol is involved or is a risk
factor rather for cardiovascular disease
or cerebrovascular disease now would
probably be a time to to mention it
yeah um this has been looked at in a
number of ways
um and you know so if you if you look at
sort of Top Line epidemiology and you've
heard of these things called the French
paradox which is oh come on like they
eat all of this fatty stuff and drink
all this wine and they have a slightly
lower risk of cardiovascular disease you
just have to kind of throw that stuff
out the window because there's so many
confounders there that it's kind of
useless epidemiology
if you really look at the data clearly
and there was actually a really elegant
analysis that included some genetic
studies that came out in Jama about a
year ago
it's actually pretty clear that there is
no dose of ethanol that is healthy
okay so there's no J curve so it used to
there used to be kind of this literature
that said there's a J curve associated
with ethanol so meaning
um at total abstinence there's a
slightly higher risk of death than if
you're drinking one drink a day and then
if you go beyond one drink a day the
rest the rate of death starts to climb
the problem with that analysis so
there's just been a lot of consternation
around that but the problem with those
analyzes are multiple but the most
important of these are that the
abstainers have a reason for abstaining
typically
and those reasons can't be extracted
statistically from these analyzes
so I'll leave it at that without I mean
I've written many blog posts about this
if people are really interested um they
can they can go and talk about that I
also do talk about this a little bit in
the book by the way
um but the the short answer is there is
no dose of ethanol that is healthy I
would argue that it's not a straight
line of risk but it probably goes I
think from zero to one there's probably
no measurable harm for most people one
per day or one per week probably one per
day up to one per day it's probably very
difficult to discern the harm but I'm
gonna put a caveat on that that I'll
come back to and then I think the risk
starts to climb pretty steeply after
that and I think it climbs non-linearly
after that that is my reading of the
literature
okay so then how do you decide if you're
going to have up to one drink a day and
by the way that's not the same as seven
a week because that doesn't mean seven
in a day right which we know is is
really detrimental right for especially
for the brain right but also the
Cascades that result from uh disrupted
sleep not just for that one night but
multiple nights yeah the the literature
I've seen on alcohol you know that the
most now again this is an emerging
literature because
um what you're describing is exactly
right but people are now some more
conservative folks are starting to place
it at two drinks per week
total Beyond which you start running
into issues especially for women in
terms of breast cancer risk which is
something maybe we can we can Circle
back I mean look my view is if you can
not drink at all you're better off not
drinking at all and people always say to
me well Peter what's your view on this
and my view is I do drink
um I'll go weeks at a time without
having a drink I haven't had a drink you
know I've had one drink since I saw you
last a couple weeks ago because I've
been sick so I'm thinking well gosh like
the deck is stacked against me right now
why would I do anything to stack it more
um
but my philosophy which is half
tongue-in-cheek but is is true is like I
just don't drink bad alcohol
you know I I sort of my wife saw me do
this the other day we opened up a bottle
of wine and it was a very expensive
bottle of wine and I took a sip and I
was like yeah I just dumped my glass I
was like I don't know just doesn't taste
right to me and it tasted fine to her so
I don't think it was that the wine had
spoiled it was just I didn't like the
taste of it enough to justify drinking
it I was like I don't feel like drinking
it yeah I'm fortunate there were times
in life yeah certainly college and
portions of graduate school when I drank
but I've never really enjoyed the the um
taste or experience of alcohol so I all
the alcohol in the plant could disappear
I wouldn't even notice but I'll have one
every once in a while I'm sort of of
that mindset but
um great to hear that zero is better
than any
um because I think everyone agrees on
that so
it doesn't appear that alcohol can be
directly linked to cardiovascular
disease and cerebrovascular disease
although where these indirect effects
through insulin yeah altering insulin
sensitivity I think I think the the
impact of sleep on cardiovascular
cerebrovascular disease is profound and
I do think that the impact of ethanol
and sleep is underappreciated yeah and
here I think we should
um do a little uh
nod to Matt Walker the great Matt Walker
because you know 10 years ago if um we
if someone had a conversation about
sleep and how critical it is and how not
getting enough quality sleep is
dangerous ever people would have just
kind of shake their heads and say what's
the evidence for that I think Matt
really deserves
um most of the credit for alerting
people to these issues around not
getting enough sleep it's just
remarkable what's happened in the last
decade thanks to Matt
and and while we're on that topic we you
know we have the other next Horseman of
death the neurodegenerative diseases I
think those are also heavily impacted
especially on the dementia side uh by
ethanol so again I want to be careful
when I say this stuff right I don't
believe in fear-mongering okay I I you
know I just said a moment ago I'll say
it again I I drink alcohol and I'm going
to continue to drink alcohol but I think
that one has to make the trade-offs
which is like
if I really do love the taste of certain
Spanish wines I really do love the taste
of certain Tequilas certain mezcals and
I really do love the the taste of
certain weird esoteric Belgian beers and
it really does give me pleasure to
consume those things in the same way it
gives me pleasure to conserve certain
foods that are quite vapid right you
know there's no upside in consuming a
brownie that my kid just made except for
the fact that my kid just made it and
it's fun to eat the brownie with them
right so
you know
we come back to this thing about like
longevity is also about health span and
part of Health span is quality of life
and you know I write about this in the
book that I I think there is a day when
my approach to this was purely an
engineering approach which was we're
going to optimize every molecule of my
being for this and if you if you go so
far down that rabbit hole that the
quality of your life deteriorates what's
the point
so that's why I think for somebody like
you who says like you could take all the
alcohol off the face of the earth I
wouldn't even notice then that's a great
reason not to bother drinking I wouldn't
put myself at the opposite end of that
Spectrum but I'm probably further to the
Spectrum you know where
yeah if you told me I could never drink
alcohol again I would be fine with it
but I'd be giving something up that I
enjoy
um but at the same time I know if I have
two drinks with dinner my sleep sucks
and therefore that's that's just a
threshold I rarely rarely cross
I certainly have my vices of alcohol
just doesn't happen to be one of them
what about cancer
again nobody wants cancer we've all
known people have died of cancer or have
had cancer
what can be done to reduce one's risk of
cancer
well you asked earlier about the numbers
so let's throw some numbers out there
right so globally we're talking about 11
12 million deaths per year about half
the number of ascvd still a staggering
number
um
at the individual level put it this way
somewhere between one and three and one
in four chance anyone listening to this
or watching this is going to get cancer
in their lifetime but what's the
probability they will die from that
about a one in six chance of dying okay
so is it true that every male gets
prostate cancer most in other words
every man will die with prostate cancer
and some will die from it
you and I have prostate cancer right now
thank you for informing yes uh hopefully
we will not die of it we should not die
of it prostate cancer colon cancer are
Cancers that no one should ever die from
because they're so easy to screen for
they are so easy to treat when they are
in their infancy
um that it's totally unacceptable that
people are dying from this there are
other cancers for which I can't really
say that breast cancer much more
complicated pancreatic cancer much more
complicated glial by stormy multiformate
much more complicated so the you know as
you said a second ago cancer is not a
disease it is a category of diseases
each it's not just that each organ is
different and breast differs from
pancreatic it's that within breast
cancer Erp are positive her2 new
positive is a totally different disease
from the triple negative breast cancers
those with bracha mutations or non-braca
mutations well even putting that aside
just looking at the the hormone profile
of the individual breast cancers they're
totally different diseases so it's not
just that breast cancer is different
from prostate cancer it's that all
breast cancers are quite different maybe
I should frame the question a little
differently than given the vast number
of different types of cancers and
categories your question is still a fair
one I just wanted to throw that caveat
out there so now to your question okay
so what do we know
it turns out that we can very
comfortably speak to
um several things one is the role that
genes play
so
um
maybe I'll just spend one second on a
gene 101 thing for for the for the
viewer we want to differentiate between
what are called germline mutations and
somatic mutations so
um your germline and my germline are set
when we were born our germline mutations
uh any mutations we have in germline
genes are inherited from our parents
you got those things so question one is
how much of cancer results from those
types of genetic mutations and the
answer is very little less than five
percent so very you know you mentioned
one a moment ago braca okay so so
mutations in braca are germline
mutations a woman will get a bracha
mutation from one of her parents and we
will often have a sense of that just
from the family history you know when
mom and sister and aunt and grandmother
had breast cancer you've got a breast
cancer Gene now it might be braca it
might be another Gene that's not bracca
but there's no ambiguity and we test for
these genes
mostly just for insurance purposes
frankly but there's no ambiguity that
that was a germline transmission of a
gene that is driving cancer
but 95 plus percent of cancers are not
arising from germline mutations they are
arising from somatic mutations or
acquired mutations
so the question then becomes what is
driving somatic mutation
and the two clearest indications of
drivers of somatic mutation
are smoking and obesity
smoking we've talked about let's put
that aside for a moment I'm so surprised
about obesity I don't know why I'm
surprised but I've um never heard this
I'm probably just naive to the
literature yeah so obesity is now the
second
most prevalent environmental driver of
cancer now I will argue and I think I
argue this in the book hopefully pretty
convincingly
I don't think it's obesity per se I
think obesity is just a masquerading
proxy what is obesity obesity simply is
defined by body mass index well first of
all
uh I don't think I'm obese but I'm I'm
way overweight on BMI you probably are
too so you know let's just ignore
clinically diagnosable as obese are you
oh no well not well clinically maybe CMI
over 30. I don't think they're probably
there no but if I if I measure my weight
by height yeah um like my BMI is
probably 27 or 28. okay it's been a
little while since I've checked I I can
I only know body fat percentages and
things like that so so basically like
BMI is a far from perfect proxy but if
the population level it's what we use
um I wish we would get off it by the way
I think it's really crap because it
doesn't take into account lean versus
yeah
I think we could get better data if we
looked at waist to height ratio that's a
way better metric so this is just a
quick test for everybody
it's I I'm gonna argue your BMI is less
relevant to me than your eye color but
if your waist circumference is more than
50 of your height you should be
concerned okay well then I'm okay yeah
you're fired by that Patrick right
that's important so if you're six feet
tall
your waist better be under 36 inches
and if it's over I would argue that's
the definition of obesity not your BMI
being over 30. so
um back to this issue because we're
using such a crude measurement it
basically is catching a whole bunch of
stuff but the question is what's driving
it and I think if you really look at the
physiology of cancer
I don't think it's obesity I think it's
two things that come with obesity
insulin resistance
which is you know two-thirds to three
quarters of obese individuals are
insulin resistant and inflammation
and I think those two things with the
inflammation in the immune dysfunction
with the insulin resistance and the
hyper
basically tonic growth stimulus that's
coming that's what's driving cancer so
again is it because a person is storing
extra fat
you know and their love handles that
that's driving the risk of cancer no
that that's those are just two things
that are coming along for the ride so
Beyond those two things
and along with certain they're also
certain environmental toxins we
absolutely know are doing this right so
we understand that people who you know
have exposure to asbestos have a much
higher risk of certain types of lung
cancers and things like that but for the
most part
um those are our big risks beyond that
we talk about alcohol in certain cases
absolutely
um alcohol is a carcinogen
um it's the dose part still isn't clear
to me I don't know
is one drink a day
moving the needle much on cancer risk
per se it's not clear and it might
depend on those uh genetic
predispositions yes
so
so yeah if Step One is don't get cancer
you have no control over your genes
you have control over smoking you have
control over insulin sensitivity
I wish I could sit here and tell you
that there is a proven anti-cancer diet
or that if you do x amount of exercise
per
week you're going to not get cancer
we just don't have a fraction of the
control over cancer that we have with
cardiovascular disease we we don't
understand the disease well enough
so we don't understand kind of the
initiation process and the propagation
process
um
and we you know we
we have to rely much more on screening
are there good whole body screens for
cancer in other words can I
walk into a tube and
um or a cylinder rather and get screened
for the presence of tumors any and
everywhere in the body outside the brain
because the brain's a little harder to
to get to right believe it or not the
brain is actually pretty easy to screen
for us so fatty and floating in water
well and also the head when you put the
head into an MRI scanner there's no
movement
it's the least motion artifact is in the
brain so when you use something called
diffusion weighted Imaging with
background subtraction in an MRI a
technology that was actually pioneered
in the brain for stroke identification
it's also really good at looking for
tumors as well
um so
let me make the argument for why
screening matters because this is again
kind of an area where I go far down a
rabbit hole in a way that I think
traditional medicine would argue against
so
my argument for screening is an argument
at the individual level and it goes as
follows
to my knowledge there is not a single
example of a cancer that is more
effectively treated when the burden of
cancer cells in the body is higher than
when it is lower
uh so the two examples I think I talk
about in the book are colon cancer and
breast cancer so when you take an
individual with stage four colon cancer
that means that the cancer has left the
colon and is now outside of the colon so
it's usually in the liver at a minimum
potentially in the lungs or in the brain
that person's five-year survival is very
low their 10-year survival is zero
we will treat them with a very
aggressive regimen of multiple drugs
and again you'll get a five-year
survival of you know maybe 10 to 20
percent and by 10 years nobody's alive
if you take a person with stage three
colon cancer
so the colon cancer is big and it's even
in the lymph nodes around the colon but
at least grossly you can't see colon
cancer cell you can't see those cells in
the liver microscopically of course we
know they're there because if you don't
treat those patients they still die of
colon cancer but you whack them with the
same chemo regimen that you are going to
give the metastatic patients
eighty percent of those people are alive
in five years
so night and day difference in survival
what's the difference in the person with
metastatic cancer you're treating a
person with hundreds of billions of
cells
in the adjuvant setting which is what we
We call we call it adjuvant when you
treat people who have only microscopic
disease you're treating billions of
cells
the same is true with breast cancer so
we have the clinical trial data to put
them side by side so
rule number one is don't get cancer rule
number two is catch cancer as early as
possible if you're going to get it
which brings us to your question of how
do you screen for it
um we basically screen
the first line of screening is is
Imaging is is is is a sort of
visualization so you have cancers that
occur outside the body that you can look
at directly so skin cancer you can look
directly at the skin uh esophageal
gastric colon cancer are those are
outside the body right mouth to anus
embryologically is outside the body so
you can put a scope in and you can look
directly at the cancer
but for all other cancers that are
inside the body yeah you have to rely on
some sort of Imaging modality although
now we're starting to look at things
things called liquid biopsies so blood
tests that are looking for cell free DNA
and the cell free DNA gives us a sense
of
based on the epigenetic signature of
what you're looking at hey is there a
cancer in the body and if so what tissue
is it potentially coming from based on
these epigenetic signatures
so the problem with relying on any one
modality is a is a problem of
sensitivity and specificity optimization
now with MRI scanners which are in some
ways the best way to do this because
they don't have radiation so you don't
want to be incurring damage as you do
this the irony of doing a whole body CT
scan the screen for cancer is your you
know whole body CT scan would be close
to you know 30 to 50 millisieverts of
radiation
staggering someone radiation so does
that mean that people should uh sorry to
pull you off this but
um
I was going to ask about this anyway
avoiding going through the whole body
scanner at the airport
um noise Solo solo yeah you know going
through a whole body scanner at the
airport or even getting a dexa scan I
mean these are trivial amounts of
radiation what about flying you know uh
you hear that Pilots get more uh get
more yeah if you're a pilot who's flying
over the North Pole back and forth and
back and forth you're probably getting
you know five to ten millisieverts a
year the NRC suggests that nobody should
get more than 50 millisieverts a year so
uh you and I both travel a fair amount
but typical travel for the busy person
let's say um two round-trip flights of
uh more than two hours per month and an
international trip every three months
probably still less than a millisievert
a year yeah uh living at sea level one
millisievert a year living at a mile
elevation if you lived in Denver you're
a two millisiever it's a year I have to
ask standing in front of my microwave
I'm just yeah we've got friends they
they ask and this with or without testes
on the counter
that's an inside joke that uh
unfortunately unfortunately deserves no
description
um and Peter's not referring to me
um but people worry about other sources
of radiation so it doesn't sound like
the microwave is a concern
um what are the other major sources of
radiation uh I mean outside of sort of
nuclear stuff where things go yeah if
you live near a plant or there's been a
yeah there's been a uh it's mostly it's
mostly at the hands of medical
professionals right it's the CT scanner
and the pet scanner are hands down the
biggest source of radiation what about
the x-rays of the dentist when they when
they Scurry behind the wall yeah they're
they're very low okay relatively
speaking okay fluoroscopy is very high
um they tend to try to cover up all of
you that so for example if they were
doing a fluoroscopic study of your
kidney because you had a stone or if you
were getting an injection into you know
if they were doing a fluoroscopic guided
injection of one of your discs in your
neck that would be a locally pretty high
dose but they're going to cover the hell
out of you elsewhere and again if you if
you get one of these things it's not the
end of the world but boy I wouldn't want
to be getting one a month and and back
to the point about screening you know a
chest abdomen pelvis CT scan is probably
I mean look there's probably a scanner
out there now that's moving fast enough
that it's much lower but I'll give you
an example okay remember how I talked
about we do CT angiograms on all of our
patients for coronary artery disease
um an off-the-shelf scanner for this is
20 milliseconds of radiation
okay so calibrate calibrate me because
40 of your annual allotment
oh wow so the medical uh practitioners
really are the uh the major culprits
here that's right so what what we say is
and I think most doctors are now
realizing this is no no it behooves you
to pay a little bit more to go to a
really good place that can do that scan
for two millisieverts meaning they have
a much faster CT scanner much better
software and they're better Engineers so
they have better engineering that they
can do on the scanner to get that done
so so I if someone listening to this
here's my take do not get a CT scan or
any Imaging study without asking how
much radiation am I seeing and if a
person can't tell you how many
millisieverts of radiation you're being
exposed to then just say I'm going to
wait a minute until somebody can tell me
that
I I realize and keep in mind 50 if you
you know if 50 is the most you should
ever be exposed to in a year there
better be a damn good reason why I'm
gonna get 25 in a day now there are some
people who have to do this if you're a
cancer patient and they're scanning you
as a part of your treatment I mean you
know you have to pick and choose between
those two those two opportunities so I
don't want to I don't also don't wanna
create some fear-mongering where oh my
God if you hit 50 in e or your hose no
it's just I wouldn't want to hit 50 a
year every year for my whole life and I
certainly wouldn't want to be hitting
hundreds a year for any period of time I
think we're just trying to raise
awareness and and also calibrate people
to you know what the sources are and and
so they make can make good choices not
um to place them into his chronic state
of fear or even an acute state of fear
for that reason we prefer MRI scanners
because there's no radiation
I realize this might sound like a
specialized circumstance but I'll just
start off um with my own which is you
know when I was a graduate student I um
worked with fixative so para
formaldehive formaldehyde excuse me um
gluta aldehyde we know that these are
mutagens they mutate cells not good you
do some molecular biology in the lab you
use DNA intercalating dye those little
bands and gels the reason they label is
because they get between the DNA not
good if for to get into your own uh DNA
um and that's a very specialized
circumstance I also injected treaty
radioactive Proline into the animals and
things of that sort again very
specialized and yet
most people I think uh will be exposed
to pesticides
um they'll put
um stuff on their lawn or they'll have
um paint thinners and things of that
sort is there any sense of what the
average if one can average risk
um is incurred in terms of carcinogens
just through his interaction with
um you know weed killers uh paint
thinner
detergents around the house that you
know we now know there's some major
lawsuits that have been successful
against the the manufacturers of these
things and what is the real cancer risk
created by having those kinds of
solvents and
um pesticides and things around I don't
I don't think I know truthfully I think
it's very complicated to calculate such
things when the when their ubiquity is
so high
um so so one one argument is look it's
kind of baked into the Baseline
prevalence of cancer today because these
things are so ubiquitous asbestos in
California for whatever reason it seems
that there's asbestos warning on pretty
much every building if you look
carefully enough except maybe the ones
built in the last five years right I
don't think I've ever worked in a
building where the elevator was updated
in terms of the inspection it was always
like 10 years back you always see it
while you're in the elevator no one
seems to worry about those or where
there was not an asbestos warning or a
lead warning it seems like it it's just
kind of everywhere and they're noting it
in these little Flags I I don't walk
around worried about I don't lose sleep
over it but it sounds like a real risk
or else they wouldn't bother right
clearly they're just trying to cover
their yeah it might be a little more cya
than anything at this point I mean I I
don't know how much of a risk asbestos
poses when it's not being agitated in
other words I don't know that the
asbestos in the ceiling you know four
layers up is really a problem but if
they had to come in here and rip this
you know ceiling apart I don't want to
be in here either it was like post 911 a
lot of the workers were selling the
World Trade Center
um pits because that's what was left um
sadly were uh developed cancers right
probably from exposure to those kinds of
things well I mean I would argue it's
also okay the fuel just the unbelievable
amount of pollution micro pollution that
was in the air following those things I
mean that's devastating stuff so yeah
those are those are fortunately the
outlier events that are that are
dramatic but again my my focus is
basically look
I could hermetically seal myself
somewhere in the world maybe
and maybe that would reduce my Risk by
one percent or but I'm gonna Focus my
energy on what I control because that's
really hard for me to control I like
focusing my things on like folks in
manager on things I can control what I
can control is the uh timing and
frequency of my screening
that's I can't control my genes anymore
um they are what they are I got whatever
predisposing cancer genes I'm gonna get
uh I might be lucky in this regard and
that I seem to get all these horrible
heart disease genes and maybe not as
much but you can also argue I got there
are cancer bad genes in me that we don't
really know about because everybody was
dying of heart disease so young
um
but boy am I going to control the
screening thing what what source of
genetic screening do you recommend to
your patients because there are a lot of
them there's 23 me there's whole genome
sequencing in place you know available
now in a variety of formats this is
actually one of the questions our
research team is working on as we speak
so
um we're
we're trying to decide so we do genetic
screening for certain things like apoe
it's a gene we want to know in everybody
um
for its role in neurodegenerative
disease correct uh specifically an
Alzheimer's disease uh we are
selectively using cancer screening in
some patients
but in our practice it's less important
because we're generally so aggressive
anyway that it turns out to be a little
bit moot we don't learn a lot in the
genetic screening that's changing our
screening practices because we're so
thorough in our family history and we're
so aggressive in everybody regardless of
family history but I think there's a
place for these things for example if
you're looking for reimbursement on
certain tests uh you know give an
example right so colon cancer
historically was not covered by a
colonoscopy screening for colon cancer
was not covered until you were 50.
that's been bumped to 45. we still think
everybody should be screened no later
than 40. no I haven't had one so I
suppose I should yeah I mean look I'm 50
and I've had three already so again why
because colon cancer is not just the
third leading cause of cancer death it's
a hundred percent preventable why
because every colon cancer comes from a
polyp
and every polyp can be seen on a
colonoscopy so there's simply no reason
to not know that and that has to be
weighed against the cost of the
colonoscopy both the financial cost and
the risks which are very low but not
zero
um you know there's a risk that comes
from electrolyte abnormalities and
hypertension from the bowel prep there's
a risk from the sedation and there's
obviously a risk of you know bleeding or
perforation that comes from the
colonoscopy itself again in in a in a
generally healthy person those risks are
so low that they're almost difficult to
quantify as evidenced by a recent New
England Journal medicine paper that was
a very anti-colonoscopy paper which I
won't get into because it's it's it's
probably a little bit of a tangent but
what's interesting is despite being a
very anti-colonoscopy paper this paper
does a better job demonstrating the
safety of colonoscopy than anything else
um
it just
um was a oddly designed experiment so
the biggest challenge with aggressive
screening posture is the specificity
problem
which is when you stack more and more
modalities around these things you're
going to start finding things that
aren't cancer so MRI has a very high
sensitivity
in English that just means if a cancer
is present an MRI is very likely to see
it
but it has a very low specificity which
means in English it will see a bunch of
things and think they are cancer when
they are not and it's most troubled by
glandular tissue so glandular tissue is
the Achilles heel of MRI
and therefore when you use as we do
Whole Body MRI for cancer screening we
tell our patients going in
let's look at 25 chance we're going to
find something that is not cancer but
will require us to do further
investigation if you're not cool with
that which is totally fine we probably
shouldn't do this
and again most people are okay with that
but it helps to set that expectation
going in that you're going to probably
be chasing your tail looking at some
stupid thyroid nodule that is absolutely
nothing I mean I can't tell you how many
useless thyroid nodules we've had to get
ultrasounds on that prove to be
absolutely nothing and you but you have
to follow them for a couple of years to
make sure they're nothing what is the
typical cost of a whole body MRI and so
for people who are not your patients how
would they go about getting those
because I think most people's general
practitioner is not going to script that
out for them
correct
um
I don't know the short answer because I
don't know how many different places are
doing it I can tell you that we use a
couple of different facilities and I
should disclose that I'm a founder of
one of them
um but we use a scanner that probably
um
we send our patients to any anywhere
they want to go but within a certain
company that we like
um that's not a company I have an
affiliation with and I believe they're
charging about twenty five hundred
dollars can you since you don't have an
affiliation can you mention that because
for instance uh you are not my physician
sadly for me
um and luckily for you
um but I'd love to get a whole body MRI
um so what where can I what is this
company so the the company that that
makes the MRI that that we're using
right now is called pronuvo
um I I interviewed the chief technology
officer in the head radiologist uh of
that company on one of my podcasts
um it's a super interesting Technology
based out of Vancouver
and for a long time that was the only
scanner in the world so I had my first
scan back in 2015 I went up to Vancouver
to get it done uh probably had my first
two up there
they've now opened locations all over
the country so they've got they've got
one in the Bay Area they've probably got
one here in La
um I know they have one in Dallas so
they've got them all over the place
great
um and then the company that I'm
affiliated with
is a different type of company that does
all sorts of Diagnostics but among them
is we have a prenuvo scanner in that
company that company is called biograph
and that's in the Bay Area biograph
biographia spelled as one respect yep
yep
that's very helpful in terms of
understanding the general risk and ways
to offset cancer to the extent that one
can and certainly what the what the
consideration should be number three on
the list of ways to die you should just
title this ways to die or we should
title this how not to die
um too early
neurodegenerative disease this is an
area I'm I'm familiar with uh not
because of my own experience thankfully
but because of my relationship to the
Neuroscience community and last time I
checked
I
was told that everyone experiences some
age-related cognitive decline so we all
get less uh proficient debt Focus memory
um
complex context dependent task switching
all that stuff
as we get older but it's the slope of
that line that really can be controlled
to some extent and that Alzheimer's
dementia represents just a steep
acceleration downward uh acceleration of
all of that
um
that was what I was told I'm guessing
that even though I kind of reside in
this not kind of but I'm reside in that
community that some of that is being
revised especially with respect to the
underlying causes of Alzheimer's because
there's a lot of controversy even
Scandal around this whole
app
[Music]
um amyloid plaque tangle stuff which is
the stuff of textbooks for medical
students and Neuroscience students what
is the story with neurodegenerative
disease Alzheimer's in particular
how can we offset it and perhaps
as importantly how can we all slow
our own cognitive decline irrespective
of whether or not we get what is called
Alzheimer's dementia so Alzheimer's
disease is both the most prevalent form
of dementia and the most prevalent
neurodegenerative disease so it occupies
that unique spot
uh we're talking about roughly six
million people in the United States have
Alzheimer's disease that's one in uh
let's see I mean
about two percent
of the total population
okay but that doesn't include those with
mild cognitive impairment or
pre-dementia or other forms of dementia
and of course the right metric is not
what percent of the population which of
course includes children things like
that it's you know so the more function
of age yeah so it's like is age the
major risk factor for cancer Alzheimer's
lately we say with glaucoma disease I'm
much more familiar with because my lab
worked on it for many years the biggest
risk factor for getting glaucoma is age
yeah the greatest risk factor for
cardiovascular disease is age the
greatest respect for cancer is age
um we tend to not spend a lot of time
talking about that because it's not a
modifiable risk
so you know we tend to focus on
modifiable risk factors
um
so
what else can we tell you just to give
you kind of lay of the land so the
second most prevalent neurodegenerative
disease would probably be Lewy Body
dementia followed by Parkinson's disease
although the rate of growth of
Parkinson's disease is the highest so I
think we'd probably be most you know we
those three diseases we want to really
be paying a lot of attention to as you
know there are a lot of other
neurodegenerative diseases every one of
these things is devastating like
multiple sclerosis yeah multiple
sclerosis uh ALS Huntington disease
these are awful awful diseases
um there are also other kinds of
Dementia vascular dementia is not
Alzheimer's dementia but it is it
produces
comparable symptoms each of these things
by the way are slightly different Lewy
Body is a dementia it's a dementing
disease but it also has a movement
component so it sort of sits on a
spectrum that's sort of you know I mean
Loosely halfway between Alzheimer's
disease and Parkinson's disease
um we talked obviously about age being
the number one risk factor kind of not
that interesting because can't do
anything about it so the real goal is as
we age what are we doing to reduce risk
um
well let's start with an important Gene
the gene that everybody's heard of
certainly uh came up a lot on the
Limitless special where Chris Hemsworth
was
um you know made the decision to reveal
something that none of us expected when
we started that whole series which was
that he ended up being homozygous for
the apoe4 isoform so
um maybe folks understand we have two
copies of every Gene so for Gene X you
have copy that you got from your mom and
copy that you got from your dad
and the apoe gene is kind of a unique
Gene and that it really it has three
different isoforms that are all
considered normal none of them are
mutations
so you have the E2 isoform the E3
isoform and the E4 isoform the E4
isoform is the OG isoform that's the one
that we have historically had
as far back as we can go
we actually think the E4 isoform offered
a lot of advantages back in the day it's
a bit of a pro-inflammatory
isoform and it certainly offered
protection against infections especially
parasitic infections in the CNS which
would have been a really important thing
to select for 200 000 years ago how do
parasites get into the CNS media
blood-brain barrier a thick skull I mean
not trauma I'm not calling I'm not
telling you yeah but they still but but
I mean it just seems like parasites and
other tissues would be an issue because
what we're talking about here is brain
disease yeah yeah anyway
but it also could have predicted them it
probably offered some protection outside
of the brain as well
um
anyway the
um
the E3 isoform I think showed up
I think 50 000 years ago
and the E2 isoform showed up very
recently about 10 000 years ago
now today we realize that there's a
clear stratification of risk when it
comes to Alzheimer's disease that tracks
with those isoforms so because you have
two copies you basically have six
combinations of how you can combine
those genes you could be two two two
three two four three three three four
four four
um the prevalence of them is basically
as follows three three is now the most
common three is the most common so
double three is 55 ish percent of the
population the next most common is the
three four which is about 25 of the
population
and then after that most things are kind
of a rounding error so uh two threes and
two fours uh would be the next most
common four fours are very rare and
tutus are the rarest of them all two
twos are less than one percent four
fours are about one to two percent
um
very important Point here is that the E4
genes are not deterministic
so they're highly associated with the
risk but they're not deterministic there
are at least three deterministic genes
in Alzheimer's disease uh one is called
psen one another one is called psen2 and
another one is called app
those genes collectively make up about
one percent of cases of people with
Alzheimer's disease so they're
fortunately very rare genes but sadly
they are deterministic meaning if you
have those genes you do get Alzheimer's
disease and what's perhaps most
devastating about those genes is how
early the onset is of the disease these
are people that are usually getting
Alzheimer's disease in their 50s
um so we do have a patient in our
practice actually she's spoken about
this very openly
um who's whose mom had one of these
genes
um and she you know got Alzheimer's
disease in her early 50s was I I think
she might have made it into her 60s
before she died but you know absolutely
devastating consequences here why do
people with Alzheimer's die because I
know about the hippocampal degeneration
hippocampus of course being an area of
the brain important for learning and
memory uh but is there brain stem
degeneration do they lose breathing
centers or cardiovascular usually what
happens is it's sort of failure to
thrive aspiration things like that yeah
so it's usually they just stop eating or
they can't control secretions they
aspirate they get a pneumonia or they
really lose the ability to even sense
like pain in their body and therefore
like they'll get an ulcer and they don't
realize it and it'll become cellulitic
and they'll develop a horrible infection
in response to it I see so it's a body
vulnerability the reason I asked is yeah
every once in a while a news report will
come out and based on a legitimate case
study where
um they'll do a scan on some person and
discover that they're missing literally
half their cerebral cortex like huge
chunks of brain and they're functioning
relatively normally and so here we're
talking about energy disease of
relatively it's widespread but there are
a few hot spots of course in the brain
that degenerate more profoundly than
others and and the people dying so that
makes sense it extends to lack of
peripheral awareness or control and then
some some acute injury or injection got
it
um
you mentioned earlier some of the
controversy right so what what are we
talking about here well it it it's that
I I do write about this at length in the
chapter on Alzheimer's disease because I
think this is a very important point
right which is the index case for
Alzheimer's disease there's always an
index case right you know there's the
the quote-unquote patient zero
um the index case
was a woman who you know 100 years later
we realized had an app mutation
obviously these are app or psen1 but she
had one of these deterministic genes
that led to a very early onset of
disease which by the way without which
we may not have come up with the
diagnosis because had she just got
Alzheimer's disease in her 70s it would
have just been referred to as senility
which is you know was not interesting
enough to pay attention to
um
but I think it probably set the field on
the path towards an over emphasis on
amyloid beta
um and
it's not really clear
how important amyloid is which is not to
say it's not important it is important
and there's no ambiguity that amyloid is
responsible for the um the changes that
we see in the brain
but it's not crystal clear because there
are lots of autopsies that are done on
people that are completely healthy and
have died with no cognitive impairment
and they're chock full of amyloid
so
what we don't fully understand is
exactly what does removing amyloid do
the other thing that complicates the
story is there has been no shortage of
drugs that Target amyloid that have
seemed unsuccessful and uh just to
clarify when you say amyloid you mean
people have died with their brains
examined in autopsy and see that there
are tons of so-called amyloid plaques
correct
um different than uh arterial plaques of
course but within the brain so that the
two Hallmarks of Alzheimer's
um uh histopathologically would be
plaques and Tangles
um and even that now is of course coming
under under question
um but for that's what we teach every
Neuroscience yeah graduate student it's
what we teach every undergraduate it's
also what we teach every medical student
um and not just at Stanford but
everywhere uh so I have heard that the
the link between app and whether or not
one develops or genes for relate to app
and whether or not it's cleaved at one
side or another it's just what you were
describing and risk for Alzheimer's yeah
so it's basically a question it's a
cleavage question right so app people
with the app mutation I think have one
extra cleavage site
um they result in one extra cleavage of
amyloid and then it misfolds and the
misfolding is is what the plaque is it's
being created that also then predisposes
them to the neurofibrillary tangles and
um again
but all this is under question now right
well I mean this is what I was told and
and when I look it sounds like there
were some early there were some papers
early in the chain of Discovery
um and the research in Alzheimer's that
um were either wrong because they were
falsified intentionally there was an
intentionally falsified paper on one
particular amyloid uh variant and that
clearly set the field back a decade
because a lot of people went down that
rabbit hole based on deliberately
falsified data
um then what happened to that guy I'm
gonna assume I don't know why assume as
a guy but what happened to that guy yeah
it's a good question
um I think I wrote One Piece about it
when it happened I actually reached out
to the person who broke the story
because I wanted to have them on my
podcast and
yeah I forget why he didn't do it I
forget why he he wouldn't commit to it
or something like that I thought it was
a little odd because I thought this
would be a great way to talk about this
um I do not know what came of that
scandal in other words I I haven't paid
attention to it for probably nine months
so I don't know you know obviously the
paper's probably been recalled but I
don't know what disciplinary action was
taken
um
the field is
I don't know I don't want to speak like
I'm in the field because I'm not so I
don't I want to be careful what I say
but I think the field is
probably in in a bit of a crisis because
there's there have been so many bets
placed on anti-amyloid therapies and
amyloid biomarkers and amyloid
everything and we just haven't seen
efficacy right so contrast that with
cardiovascular disease where
you know you have this APO biomarker you
you understand the pathophysiology of
how it works you have drugs that Target
it so you have a biomarker so you give
somebody a drug that lowers apob you can
measure APO B that's a really important
and obvious thing to be able to do and
then you have clinical outcomes which is
oh when you take a bunch of people in
primary prevention it takes this long
before you see an effect in secondary
prevention it only takes this long to
see an effect right different risk
stratifications all these different
things we don't have any of that for
Alzheimer's disease
so we do use there are now serum amyloid
biomarkers that we use and we do track
these in our highest risk patients
but only because we believe and I don't
know if we're right by the way that
lower is better and therefore if we make
these changes to you and your serum
amyloid levels come down that that tells
us something about what's happening in
your brain that's favorable but
I mean I would hate to represent that we
are practicing nearly the level of
precision medicine there that we are in
cardiovascular medicine
when it comes to Alzheimer's disease
maybe take a step back when it comes to
brain health I think there are a handful
of things that seem unequivocally true
and there's a lot of stuff that is
signal to noise ratio that's really low
so the unequivocally true things for
brain health are sleep matters
another unequivocally true thing for
brain health is that lower LDL
cholesterol and apob is better than
higher
another thing that is unequivocally true
is not having type 2 diabetes matters
to having really being in yeah but the
insulin sensitive muscle insensitive
matters sleeping adequately matters
having lower lipids matters those three
things are clear and the fourth one that
is unequivocally clear is exercise
matters more specific form of exercise
uh very I mean so I tried to answer this
question on a recent AMA that I did
because the answer is more is always
better but if you if I tried to have one
of our analysts look at it through the
lens of if you could only exercise three
hours a week what would be the highest
use case and
our interpretation of the literature was
if you could only spend three hours a
week exercising you'd be best off doing
one hour of low intensity cardio one
hour of strength and one hour of
interval training
so if someone said like I only want the
minimum effective dose you're going to
get a pretty good bang for your buck
doing that but I would argue if your
brain really matters to you do more one
hour of interval training is no joke no
because you're going to spread that out
over probably at least two workouts yeah
um but Andrew those four things are
basically the only thing where there's
there's no ambiguity about the benefit
what about head hits like don't get
don't hit your head uh seems almost
assuredly true in a susceptible
individual for sure
um so I put that yeah maybe we could
include that as well well I just imagine
you know one of the things I've been
learning recently is I know you boxed
um uh for a number of years when you
were younger I I boxed a little bit hit
my head a number of times skateboarding
but you know we think about sports
injuries is the major cause of head
injuries but then I've got colleagues
car accidents bike bike accidents I've
got so many colleagues and children of
colleagues growing up in and around
campus that were hit by cars on Woodside
Road or you know I mean or small objects
surrounded by you know three was a car
weight three thousand pounds or
something like that more um you know
it's unbelievable the number of head
injuries and then construction sites
because those ridiculous little hard
hats which um don't protect against
anything except um I don't know maybe uh
wind blown hair they they basically
predispose the whole situation
predisposed people that had injuries
very common on construction sites and
then
um saying nothing of military Etc so I
think that
um I was told that the the best thing to
do if you get a head injury
um is to not get another one in other
words if you can stop doing the activity
that leads to more head injury yeah the
other thing that I think is emerging and
I hope it is studied rigorously is the
use of hyperbaric oxygen immediately
following a TBI a traumatic brain injury
reached out to
um Dom D'Agostino a little while ago to
kind of because he knows a lot about
this lit
um to say hey is there anything out
there that's really kind of TurnKey
convincing and he said not yet
um they're still doing it right so I I
would do this like if I if I was in a
car accident tomorrow and sustained a
concussion and by the way I'm not a
proponent of hyperbaric oxygen so I you
know we have an internal white paper
that we wrote inside quite recently
where I examined
when I say I examine you know the
analyst team examined and I pushed back
and reviewed
um and I I came away very kind of
bearish on hyperbaric oxygen I don't
think I don't think it's harmful but I
think all of the claims are nonsense you
know telomere extension is totally
irrelevant and if you actually look at
the studies they're the worst done
studies I've ever seen in my life I'm
sure you've seen some of these where
it's like you put these people in a
hyperbaric chamber and then watch them
do cognitive tasks act after and they're
so much better well the fine print is
they don't even have Placebo groups here
like can you imagine doing a study
without a placebo group or your placebo
group doesn't go into a sham chamber
yeah I mean one of the big problems of
the proliferation of all these
pay-to-play journals mean girls that
will basically publish a paper with
minimal or poor peer review
um because they charge in order to
publish
um and then offer free access you know
every access sounds great but when it's
pay to play type journals there's been a
huge proliferation of papers most of
which you find on Twitter
um
in which the study design is is beyond
that like like a ninth grader who woke
up late for school and was partying all
weekend could design a better study than
most of these studies yeah and there's
some excellent studies out there as well
of course presumably and eventually on
hyper bear chamber too so I'm not
picking on hyper rare chamber per se but
the the proliferation of truly terrible
science that's published in
peer-reviewed journals is is just
overwhelming yeah it's insane and all of
that is to say I think there are places
where hyperbaric oxygen makes sense
clearly in wound healing it does it's
it's a miracle a treatment for wound
healing and I would absolutely use
hyperbaric oxygen if I suffered a
concussion
um but you know beyond that I think it's
pretty pretty tough to make the case
where do people go for that I mean their
clinics yeah their clinics you basically
go to the protocols have to be very
precise right I mean this isn't
something to Cowboy at home no no no I
no no you have to go into a real chamber
um I think the TBI protocol that's most
commonly used is
God I want to say it's pretty intense
it's like five 60-minute sessions a week
at two atmospheres oh boy like it's not
it's no joke
um so from a cost and time perspective
it's enormous and and the time and cost
are reasons why I think when I see
people doing hyperbaric oxygen just
because they think it's going to help
them live longer I'm like
dude you know what you could do with
five hours a week plus the commuting
time that you put into that like it's
put that into exercise and I promise you
you'll get a bigger benefit than you're
getting out of hyperbaric oxygen
um but there's a lot of other stuff that
I just think is
maybe helpful there's tons of
supplements that I think about when it
comes to brain health you know what
about thoracumin what about magnesium
with L3 and 8 the transporter
um what about methylated vitamins that
lower homocysteine what about EPA and
DHA
and we've gone through all of the
literature on that stuff and many of
these things we still are recommending
through a kind of basically like the
potential benefits outweigh the
potential costs but the evidence is
really unimpressive for most of those
other interventions so when you think
about the big four or big five if you
include not getting head injury
everything else is probably a rounding
error compared to those big ones
maybe just for sake of of um
thoroughness we could just list off
those four again exercise exercise sleep
insulin sensitivity
um and lipid management
well along the lines of head injuries we
should probably move to the next
category of um uh how not to die as to
avoid accidental death
uh how common is accidental death and
what are these accidental deaths because
we are separating this out from
Automotive death so is this people
um falling while hiking self selfies
gone bad
um you know what are we talking about
here
I'm not chuckling because I like it's
just I mean it seems like there's an
unmere infinite uh ways to um to die
accidentally uh and when you I think
there's two ways to kind of look at this
um I and and so here I kind of merge two
categories
um so I would call it they're they're
that overlap in the way that they're
characterized by the CDC but I would
sort of we'll we'll talk about them
separately and bring them together so if
you talk about true accidental deaths
Automotive uh and falls
and overdoses are the are the three
that's basically what it comes down to
so
you know when our death bar analysis we
kind of list all this stuff out in fact
I think that's actually one of the
figures in the book is I have the
accidental death
uh figure that we've put together where
we've adjusted by population
and you'll see a couple of things if you
look at it in absolute terms
it's basically a pretty constant so
regardless of what decade of life you're
in once you're above you know 20
accidental deaths are a pretty sizable
number of of deaths now car accidents
seem to be pretty constant throughout
life little more common if you're under
60 than over 60 but they never go away I
was told that um in teenage and boys and
and uh boys in their in their early 20s
alcohol
induced Automotive fatalities but play
Summit at this in an astronomic risk is
that just not true it's not true anymore
compared to overdoses is that because
young people now um aren't getting their
driver's licenses I've also yeah well I
think it's also because we're seeing
such an uptick in the deaths that come
from Fentanyl
got it so fentanyl related deaths have
basically squashed all other deaths
below 65 on The Accidental front
really oh it's not even close because of
the number of different substances that
fentanyl is being woven and winding its
way into everything all right so all
counterfeit drugs all illicit drugs and
look most of the time you're not getting
a lethal dose so it's you know it's it's
but but you're getting lethal doses so
often now that
um
well you know I did a little analysis
actually the other day when I looked at
how are deaths of Despair increasing
over the last five years so what did I
Define as a death of despair
suicide
alcohol-related death or overdose
accidental overdose so that we
differentiate that from suicide where
suicide is obviously deliberate and
accidental is not so if you just look at
those three things so accidental
overdoses suicides and alcohol use or
alcohol related death
um
not including driving by the way this is
like cirrhosis of the liver that comes
from
that number is going up at almost 20
percent per year since 2019.
so the I couldn't get 2022 numbers yet
so at the time of the time I did this
analysis which was last week
um
the 2021 numbers was about 210 000
Americans
goodness up from
a hundred and
hundred and eighty thousand in 2020 up
from like 150 000 2019. so is this um
and that is driven almost entirely by
fentanyl use so I'm trying to um get a
sense of how this would happen a while
back there was an article in the New
York Times that some photographs of
people that um uh
died of fentanyl overdose they and said
they they went out to buy cocaine and I
thought to myself this is a really kind
of odd socio uh biological phenomenon
right because I mean here they're
they're not demonizing these cocaine
users I mean they went out to buy
cocaine right this is not a um I know
cocaine has one narrow clinical use as a
prescription drug but in general when
people buy cocaine they're they're going
to go partying with it or using it to
work longer hours or something like that
um so the whole nature of the article
was a bit strange to me but
it clearly pointed to the fact that
people are using cocaine okay that's no
surprise but people are going out and
buying cocaine they're presumably buying
Valium they're presumably and this is
where it's really killing kids I mean
but this is online this is in person I
mean the reason I'm so so baffled by
this is let me contextualize what I what
I've said so far about this question
I was surprised that the times would
write a paper about the tragedy of
cocaine users dying of Fentanyl
and I think they did it to highlight
this fentanyl problem
um because people have been using
cocaine for a long time and typically
those are not the members of the
population that we're really focused on
since the mid 80s the so-called cocaine
and crack epidemic so basically it tells
me that people like you said illicit
drugs so cocaine but also you know what
other sources of drugs where the
majority of people are dying from
fentanyl poisoning and I had a guy on my
podcast recently named Anthony hippolito
and if anybody's interested in this
topic they really need to go listen to
that so we have to watch the YouTube
version of this and your podcasts are
excellent so people if you're interested
in this and I think everyone should be
interested in this if you have a child
or know somebody who has a child you
just got to get this podcast into their
hands because it's the most important
Public Service Announcement I'll
probably ever do in terms of saving more
lives potentially
um where the majority of this is making
its way into the into The Accidental
poisonings is through illicit
counterfeit pills
so it's when kids are out there buying
you know oxy they want oxy well they
can't they can't get real oxy right
because they're not going to go to a
doctor and get real oxy so they're going
to buy it through you know Snapchat
right they're going to buy it through
some drug dealer that they're finding on
social media
um they're buying sleeping pills they're
buying all sorts of counterfeit stuff
like Adderall any of these things are
being laced with fentanyl Adderall
absolutely
well I I assume and then again the
reasons are it's insanely cheap to use
synthetic Fentanyl and secondly and
again but the effects of fentanyl are
nothing like an effects of Adderall so
cocaine um doesn't make sense for that
reason it doesn't make sense either yep
and yet it's still showing up in cocaine
again I I don't think that's the
dominant place it's showing up I I would
I would guess that the dominant place
it's showing up is in counterfeit
opioids so any opioid barbiturate any
sedative let me tell you what I'm
telling my daughter right because this
is to me it's a front line problem I
have a 14 year old daughter I'm like
listen I don't care which friend of
yours it is I don't care how much she's
amazing if she tells you to try this
sleeping pill because she took it the
night before and it was really helpful
or this will help you study better or
this will help you do anything I'm like
just come to us we got a better pill for
you right like in other words I you
can't trust anything because you don't
know where she got it she has the best
of intentions I'm sure when she's given
it to you and by the way she probably
took it the night before and was just
fine but the people who are making these
pills are not exactly up to GMP
standards
so there you know you just have no idea
which pill is getting what dose of
fentanyl one thing that Anthony
hippolito told me that I simply couldn't
believe I had to ask him six times was
that some of these pills have like one
milligram of fentanyl in them now I made
the point on the podcast that a hundred
milligrams of fentanyl for most people
is a hit like they've like I've had
fentanyl before I've been in the
hospital and you know I've had fentanyl
100 milligrams is like
wow that is such a trip why are people
dying from one milligram intake
respiratory inhibition you can't breathe
that shuts the brainstem off
well I don't think we can highlight this
enough
um you know adults are dying kids are
dying I met someone earlier this week
who told me her 35 year old son died of
an accidental fentanyl overdose and um
he wasn't at least by her description a
drug addict or anything of that sort
yeah this is this is we're talking about
a different game now right so it's like
these are kids that have anxiety these
are kids that are you know are are are
sort of addressing another issue with
these with these pills and that's why I
think this this whole concept of deaths
of Despair is is is a really important
one but back to your question what do
accidental deaths primarily amount to
for for the Aging population again it is
so clear that it is fall related this is
where
um once you hit 60 65 the the risk of a
fall that results either immediately in
death you know you hit your head and die
going back to like cerebral hemorrhage
or
it is the straw that basically leads you
down the path to death within the next
12 months is astonishingly high it's so
high that
it's sort of hard to wrap your head
around but if you're over 65 and you
fall and break your femur or hip so you
either crack the femoral neck or the
femur itself
your 12-month mortality the probability
you will be dead in 12 months after that
break if you're 65 or older depending on
the study is about 15 to 30 percent
wow
wow so in terms of offsetting the
probability of Falls you talked a little
bit about this
um before but you and I have talked a
little bit about this before but maybe
we could go a little bit deeper
um
people's ability to jump and land seems
to be highly correlated with one's
ability to not fall or at least fall and
control the fall in a way that leads to
no or less severe injury yeah so Andy
Galpin talked about this on your past he
talked about it on my podcast
what is the Hallmark of aging on the
muscle it is atrophy of the type 2
muscle fiber that's the Hallmark that's
twitch fast twitch muscle fiber so if
you want to understand what looks
different in 50 year old Peter versus 18
year old Peter it's not my type 1 fibers
it's my type 2 fibers it's my fast
twitch fibers it's my explosive fibers I
mean when I was 18 years old I could
vertical jump over 30 inches
today I'm lucky if I can vertical jump
24 inches
and you know in when I'm 60 boy it's
like my goal is to be able to vertical
jump 60 to 20 inches when I'm 60 and I
don't know if I'm able to do it I've
seen some videos of some uh 80 year old
sprinters that are pretty impressive and
certainly 80 year old gymnasts yeah that
are impressive I've not seen very many
videos of 80 year olds um dunking
basketballs for instance
yeah who are not more who are not uh
taller than six feet five inches
um so so when we lose
you know our Mo so so again if you just
think about size strength speed
we lose speed first we lose speed then
strength and the last thing you lose is
size so again size is agnostic to fiber
right you could have big type 1 fibers
and still have lots of size they're not
going to be that strong and they're
certainly not going to be fast so what I
mean like we could go through we could
spend hours on this particular topic but
I think the most important thing that
people need to understand is
you cannot age well if you are not doing
the type of training that is there to
strengthen and delay or minimize the
hypertrophy of your type 2 fibers so
everything matters right you have to be
doing your zone two you have to be doing
you know all these other things
but some component of your training
needs to be stressing the type 2 fibers
you have to be doing strength training
that taxes those fibers you have to be
doing reactivity training you have to be
doing explosive training and ideally
some training that involves jumping and
Landing well jumping is a very big part
of it and Landing is a very big part of
another one of what I kind of think of
as my four pillars of strength training
so one of the pillars of strength
training is eccentric strength which is
breaks so
um you know you're gonna hurt yourself
10 times more likely I'm making that
number up by the way I don't know if
it's 10 times but experientially it
seems to be you are 10 times more likely
to hurt yourself stepping off something
than stepping on to something right
stepping down versus stepping up
um because when you step up onto
something you are concentrically
controlling muscle
when you step down you have to apply the
brakes and that's where most people
falter much harder to walk downhill than
uphill uphill is taxing your
cardiovascular system but if you slow
down enough you're fine but a lot of
people don't have the ability to slow
themselves down when they're walking
downhill and so when an older person
steps off a curb and can't fully stop
themselves and that results in a fall
so
you know I like doing things like a
broad jump broad Jump's a fun little
test set I like to do every once in a
while I always want to make sure I can
broad jump six feet that's kind of my
arbitrary number that I've chosen and
the reason is on the takeoff that's a
very explosive movement
but the landing is just as important if
I can't stick that Landing it means I
don't have the brakes so those are kind
of some of the tests I want to be able
to do to make sure that I'm utilizing
that system because I do think you know
look I've watched I've watched my mom my
mom fell
gosh probably been about four months ago
just fell in a typical way that people
fall
um by the way it could have happened to
anybody it's not like you know my mom
walks around and moves around just fine
but on this particular day she just
tripped on a on an uneven Stone and fell
and landed and broke her hand
and she's really lucky she didn't break
her hip and I told her that because my
mom was you know probably in her mid 70s
and I said look you know if that was
your femur I I'd give you a 30 chance of
dying in the next year
I mean it's just an un those are such
difficult to recover from injuries
because first of all you're dealing with
the immobility of you know the
hospitalization and immobility that
follows that and the amount of muscle
loss that occurs uh could easily be
you know four or five pounds of lean
tissue lost that for most people that
age becomes almost impossible to get
back
says nothing about sort of the acute
causes of death like a fat embolism that
results from a broken femur a blood clot
from laying in bed those things are also
catastrophic
but what happens is a lot of these
patients just never get back to the same
level of Mobility
and you know now I think in many ways
we're kind of pivoting from what kills
you to what ruins your quality of life
and we spend so much time talking about
what kills you but I think
you might as well be dead in some ways
if you can't do the things you want to
do and if playing with your grandkids or
gardening or playing golf or going for a
walk with your spouse or think of any of
the things that we all do today and take
for granted if you can't do those things
I don't know you sort of lose the the
reason to to be around and oftentimes
the inability to do those things is
associated with pain that you know which
is uh psychologically and obviously
physiologically so so distressing
um you mentioned the four pillars of
Health maybe just list those off
though well the four pillars of of um
longevity through physical uh
oh yeah sort of sort of the exercise
pieces of them yes yeah so strength
stability aerobic efficiency and
um aerobic Peak output okay so robot
Peak would be so vot Max in zone two
that's in my analogy that's the your
your zone two is the is how wide the
base of your pyramid is and your VO2 max
is how tall the peak of the pyramid is
so the best Pyramid has a wide base and
a high peak so you could have a
reasonably wide base and a shallow Peak
if you just did zone two training you
know you're going to get a reasonable
Peak but it's not going to be that high
you have to do some of that specific
training if you just focus on high
intensity you might drive up that VO2
max but you're actually going to have a
relatively wide a narrow aerobic base so
you think about just maximizing the area
of that triangle widest tallest
stability and strength
stability of course encompasses
everything we're talking about in terms
of reactivity
um you know I I dedicate a chapter in
the book to this concept because it is
so foreign to most people
um and and for understandable reasons
it's just it's not sexy it's not
it's the hardest one to train it's the
hardest one to understand but it's so
important because it's the thing that I
think differentiates people who age well
and and people who don't age well and I
should um perhaps throw in there please
correct me if I'm wrong but also most of
the machines that are in typical
commercial gyms
that allow people who are not very
experienced to start doing some
resistance training don't really tap
into the stability Factor terribly much
so while there's value to leg extensions
and leg curls and you know chest presses
and shoulder presses done with machines
certainly for a number of reasons and
can often be safer than free weights
especially for people who are
approaching at a later time or new to
the whole thing they don't really lend
themselves to
um real life stability walking down as
you mentioned walking downstairs uh in
the absence of a handrail or um or
movements in um uh kind of uh odd planes
you know having to step aside to avoid a
bicycle
um at an angle as opposed to just moving
you know linearly yeah and by the way a
lot of things that don't involve
machines still don't give you that right
like I mean doing a deadlift you have to
be stable to lift a heavy weight like
you would a deadlift without hurting
yourself that requires an unbelievable
capacity to harness intra-abdominal
pressure and to be connected you know
especially if you're going to lift 500
pounds off the ground you're stable but
that still doesn't prepare you for what
you just described so stability is
multi-faceted and it involves doing a
lot of things you know today for example
I finished my today was a cardio zone
two day so I did my cardio Zone too and
I you know had an extra 10 minutes
before I needed to kind of get moving
and so all I did was step ups for 10
minutes I just did single leg very slow
step up and insanely slow step Downs off
a box in a gym so two second up four
second down two second up four second
down with you know and I would do them
with ipsilateral loads contralateral
loads all sorts of different things and
you know basically that's just a
stability game for me it's like I'm
building that concentric strength in
um in a movement where it's easy to
cheat
um but can I do it without cheating
was terrific and it's terrific that you
cover all of that in the book in
addition to these other topics so
several times during our conversation
today you alluded to quality of life and
one of my favorite segments in your book
indeed the segment in your book that I
believe could be its own entire book of
tremendous value
is the section on emotional health
if you could just share with us a bit of
what inspired you to include that
section was this for instance
um based on communication with your
patients to what extent it was based on
your own life experience and then um
maybe we can drill a little bit deeper
into what's contained in those chapters
and what really constitutes emotional
health
well I mean I think that that chapter of
the book which is a pretty long chapter
It's the final chapter as well
um is certainly different from all of
the others in that there is no
uh there's no confusion about expertise
right I think in the other chapters I at
least try to come across as having some
knowledge on the subject matter and uh
I'm writing them most often as you know
quote unquote the doctor right whereas I
think that last chapter is is much more
about an experiential side of uh my
knowledge acquisition and and therefore
really it comes across more as a patient
um and I think you're right I think that
that's a chapter that
initially was resisted by all other
parties involved in the book so my
co-author
um my editor everybody else sort of felt
like this is interesting but it's a it's
a separate topic if you want to write
about this you should write another book
about it but it doesn't really belong in
this book
um
I disagreed for two reasons and
ultimately I guess my opinion prevailed
the first is
I didn't want to write another book so
it just that you know not including this
in this book to then write about it in
another book was not something I was
interested in doing but I think more
importantly I do think that this book is
about much more than how long you live
and while we have talked about and we'll
talk about uh in the book that is you
know how cognitive and physical health
are just as germane to quality of life
as they are to length of life this other
piece of emotional health
you know it's potentially the most
important of them all it's also the
hardest to Define but without it none of
this other stuff matters right so
there's you know infinite lifespan if if
if you're miserable means nothing might
be worse that would be a curse right you
could argue how could you punish
somebody
the most
allow them to live forever and be
miserable is there a um yeah there's a
Greek god yeah he was granted
immortality uh it's a bit different he
was granted immortality but without a
health span basically so he aged forever
Dreadful yeah
and this would be Dreadful too right and
I feel like
why did I need to write about this well
I think that you know this is probably
my greatest struggle I think
um
you know way at the outset of the
podcast you asked me kind of like what
are the obstacles to longevity and that
got us down a path of
some very uh black and white things but
when I look at a patient
I create a dashboard and the dashboard
is what are all the things that are a
threat to every component of your
longevity both lifespan and health span
we talked about a bunch of those things
so how what is what is your risk for
atherosclerosis and what are we doing
about it what is your risk for cancer
what are we doing about it what is your
risk for neurodegeneration what are we
doing about it what is your risk for
accidental death what are we doing about
it what is your risk for physical
decline what are we doing about it and
one of those things is what is your risk
of emotional health or poor emotional
health and what are we doing about it
um so when I do that exercise for me
which I I do right I mean I can I have
that spreadsheet laid out for me and I
know where my factors line up and
interestingly despite my family history
being horrible for atherosclerosis
it's like sixth on my list
because
I mean basically I intervened early I
have a clear understanding of the
pathophysiology and I'm doing everything
to the maximum so I'm actually very
confident I will die with and not from
atherosclerosis
but
the top thing on my list is actually
emotional health that's the one that is
the hardest for me to manage and
it's it's the easiest to get out of
balance and it creates the most pain in
my life
so that's that's a long answer to why I
felt this needed to be in here
well in the book you go into
um very honest detail about some of your
Journeys through and challenges with
emotional health and paths to overcoming
those
maybe we'll get into those a bit but
before we do how should we Define
emotional health
um this to me seems like one of the most
difficult areas to calibrate oneself
um like even just measuring emotion is
tricky uh language is the dissection
tool for
um psychologist psychiatrists and indeed
for all of us you know how are you doing
today great or a miserable or I'm
depressed I mean it means such different
things to different people obviously
suicide being the far end of of um we
presume misery I mean there are
instances of manic suicide but you know
um depressive misery but uh setting that
aside I mean how should we evaluate
think about
and communicate emotional health to
ourselves and to to the relevant people
they could potentially help us yeah well
you're right it's it's it's it's it's
it's very difficult right and and so
much of what goes into this book is
about things that are much easier to
quantify
uh it's very you know I could sit here
and talk for days about all the ways we
quantify from the histologic to the
gross of each of these diseases you know
genetically all of these other things
um with emotional health it's it's far
more vague and I don't
even attempt to come up with a
definition right I can tell you things
that make up components of it so
connectivity with others just seems to
be an inescapable part of this so the
ability to maintain healthy
relationships and attachments to other
people
having and by the way these are no
particular order
having a sense of purpose
being able to regulate your emotions
experiencing fulfillment experiencing
satisfaction
um all of these things matter and I
think that for many of us if we're
taking an honest appraisal of ourselves
we'll notice that we have deficits in
these areas
being present
by the way that's something that may
have been
less of an issue 100 years ago than it
is today so I think you know for
certainly for me being present is very
difficult it's not my default State I
don't know that it's the default state
for most people truthfully
um but I'm very often predisposed with
thoughts about the future occasionally
thoughts about the past but it's much
more often kind of thoughts about the
future and planning and thinking about
what I need to do and what do I want to
do next and never really being satisfied
with anything that's happening the
moment so I have to work hard to kind of
overcome those things and
I'm sure you can appreciate this but
when you are present
you generally are in a much better frame
of mind yeah there's an interesting
study I think it was initially published
by Dan Gilbert's lab one of these
long-term happiness studies that was
published in Science magazine
um uh that pinged people for their level
of Happiness unhappiness presence or
lack of presence multiple times
throughout the day this was in the early
years of smartphones so this is around
2010 2011 so the technology wasn't as
good as this now but it was good enough
to do this in a very large number of
people I forget how many but certainly
more than ten thousand in Pro that
number is I'm stating it intentionally
low
and what they found was regardless of
whether or not people were doing
something they enjoyed or not boring to
them or not
the degree of presence to what they were
doing was a stronger predictor of their
happiness in that moment and overall
than was anything else
um and also a pretty fairly rare feature
for most people so it seems like it's
something that we do need to work at
perhaps nowadays as you point out more
than um we perhaps had to in our
ancestral past
I'm a little bit surprised that
um
you say that you find it hard to be
present because you strike me as
somebody that
um is not just willing but has a a
strong
um almost reflex toward you know
Drilling in you know observing the
Contour or something and then really
drilling into it and really getting to
the the guts of of most everything that
interests you so you strike me as
somebody who's very present and I guess
maybe this gets back to this but they're
divisionally exclusive right I mean I
think so for example I'll notice that
sometimes if I'm playing with my kids
especially my boys because they're
younger right and and playing with them
is
really being in their world like if I'm
with my daughter we can be doing things
that are kind of mutually like you know
we will do things together that I would
probably do by myself or she would do by
herself but with my boys it's generally
doing something I wouldn't otherwise be
doing
and I'm if I'm paying attention to it
I'm constantly amazed at how after five
minutes of searching through a bin for
just the right Lego piece that we want
to do to build this one little thing
like my mind will start thinking about
something else like oh my God like I
gotta go I didn't email that dude back
and I gotta do this and I gotta do this
and I gotta do this and I gotta do this
and I just get into I gotta do I gotta
do I gotta do
and it's like dude you've only been here
for five minutes why don't you just find
the Lego piece that
you need to finish building that thing
over there that is this beautiful moment
that you're not going to have many of
right there's a very finite number of
these moments you're going to have
um so you want to savor every one of
them so again I don't think I'm alone in
that I think a lot of parents for
example can relate to that and that
that's that that's literally just one of
many different things and by the way I
wouldn't have said that that was my
greatest
challenge either but it's something that
requires I think deliberate attention
what you're alluding to is a a challenge
with um holding a single
um time perception or perception of time
uh one of the most remarkable things to
me about the the human brain is our
ability to be present or think about the
past or the future or the present and
the future and we can occupy different
timings and in a recent
um non-recorded conversation of ours uh
you showed me something that I've seen
before but for some reason this time it
had a profound impact on me which is
that you have a chart of the number of
weeks that you're going to live and you
mark them off one week at a time we were
talking about this in the context of
major life decisions
um and it illustrates the fact that we
need a Char such a chart that we can't
really move through our day being
present to the the beauty of working on
a Lego with our kid
while also paying attention to the fact
that well this is week number whatever
you know 600 in the or you know X number
of weeks of one's life
so that that um ability to uh contract
and dilate our time perception is is
marvelous but it's also
um a double-edged sword because it's
it's what takes us out of what's
meaningful in the moment
one sort of has to wonder then whether
or not our challenges in being present
um you know I guess the the
psychoanalyst maybe we need to uh or
psychiatrist maybe we'd ask our uh Paul
Conte uh
um who you know and I know
um and respect greatly
um whether or not this is some um you
know subconscious uh refusal of of our
own mortality or something right that if
we were to really contemplate our
mortality on a regular basis not just
when we're marking off the weeks of the
poster we wouldn't be able to be present
because it's kind of overwhelming right
I don't know I mean doesn't I feel like
the literature says that people who
spend more time contemplating their own
mortality are actually more at peace uh
kind of a little bit of the exposure
therapy idea
um
and so so I'm not sure it's an unhealthy
thing to be
aware of your mortality I suspect it's
it's it's helpful in as much as you
accept it right and you and you feel
like you have some agency over parts of
it right like I I don't think
I have nearly enough agency
over the length of my life I think I've
got five to ten years of wiggle room
that I can extract if I do if I do all
of the things that I've written about in
that book
I I bet I can stretch my life out 10 to
15 years at the maximum call it 10. over
what would have happened if I didn't do
those things maybe it's more but but
it you know that it depends on what
we're comparing it to right from being
reasonable to maybe being a little bit
you know hyper functioning maybe it's 10
years
but where I know I have a much greater
agency is on is in quality and for me
now a big part of that is in terms of
quality of relationships I think that's
a big thing and I
I think for most people that's that's
that's what I hope this chapter does is
it it is it sort of
allows more people to kind of take an
appraisal of that and ask that question
which is before it's too late
am I
living my life more for my resume
virtues or from my eulogy virtues to
borrow from David Brooks's work the road
to character which I I talk about as
being kind of one of the many aha
moments that I had during this journey
yeah and there again thank you you
recommended the road to character to me
I do an annual solo uh Wilderness trip
and I listen to it during the drive to
that trip and on that trip and it's a
um it's a I would just say it's a truly
important book for everyone to listen to
yeah it's really quite
um quite impressive
what are the things that you do on a
regular bit let's say on a daily basis
to try and enforce
um forgive the word but enforce
emotional well-being and health in terms
of relationships because as you point
out it's not reflexive for it for
everybody and that doesn't make them bad
people it I think it does have to do
with this challenge in balancing
expectations of work and other things
and and for some people a more inherent
selfishness and for some people
um they aren't selfish enough right I
know plenty of people are running around
trying to serve everybody and then their
health is crashing or their mental
health is crashing so it can cut any
which way or always
what what sorts of practices do you
incorporate or just even thoughts within
your own mind do you use charts and
lists I mean you're very regimented
about your workouts
um building grip strength eccentric
um zone two e-centered training zone two
Etc why wouldn't we also script out the
things to pay attention to each morning
and day as a list of to Do's well well
it I have done those things right so so
certainly you know and I write about in
the book I've gone away a couple of
times right so I I in 2017 I spent two
weeks at a facility in Kentucky in 2020
I spent three weeks at a facility in
Arizona
um and on the back end of that facility
three years ago when I got out I mean I
had uh I had a very clear list of daily
things I needed to do and so so at that
point for about six months following
getting out of that extent of rehab I
mean I was
I mean God the list of behaviors I was
doing every single day I mean twice a
day standing in front of the mirror
reading my list of affirmations writing
in my journal every single day I had
therapy every single day I mean all of
that stuff was highly regimented you
know today I would say there's no one
single behavior that is quote unquote
mandated as part of my recovery but
perhaps the most important thing that
does come up every day is
um being mindful of and acting on as
quickly as possible every time I uh do
something damaging to a relationship so
um I would say that
like if you compare Formula One
of my my favorite sport by far if you
compare Formula One
40 years ago to Formula One today the
difference is not in the number of
accidents that takes place
the difference is in the fatality of
those accidents
there are just as many if not more
accidents in Formula One today
the difference is nobody dies in those
accidents
cars are so much safer they're
engineered first for safety second for
performance it used to be the reverse
and that's why there was a day when
every second or third weekend a driver
was killed
it's catastrophic to imagine what took
place between the mid 60s and about the
mid 80s in Formula One
and similarly I would say that the
frequency with which I have
an interaction with a person who matters
to me that is not the best interaction
it could be is only slightly less than
what it was five years ago
the difference is the severity of that
is much lower and more importantly and
most importantly the length of time
between when I screw up and when I
make amends is infinitely shorter right
it went from being I would never make
amends to
if I'm a dick to my wife
I usually am trying to rectify it within
a few minutes or at most a couple of
hours
and that and so it's it's really you
know one thing I learned throughout this
journey was
if you hold yourself up to this goal if
I have to be perfect I have to be the
perfect dad I have to be the perfect
husband I have to be the perfect friend
you're going to set yourself up for
failure because you know you're just not
going to be perfect
but if instead you can say
what I'm going to be perfect about is
repairing damage when I cause it
that's what matters you know the other
day
um
I yelled at my son for something it was
a while ago actually because before I
lost my voice so you know I don't know
he was just doing something and he was
wrong you know like it was like he did
something I told him 150 times not to do
and I yelled at him and punished him
like you know but I was way too harsh
like because basically I basically
the first 27 times he did it I didn't
respond and then when I finally did it's
like I blew a gasket right
but what I realized is yeah you could
say well maybe it hurts a child to do
that but I think it hurts them way less
if you can immediately go and repair and
say hey buddy
daddy was a little harsh in that I'm
sorry I didn't mean to yell at you like
that but what you did is wrong and
you're not going to get to go out and
play right now as a result of it but I
love you very much and I want us to do
better I want it I want you to do better
and not doing this thing and I want to
do better and not yelling at you when
you do this thing so it's not it's not
rocket science right but
I just think I used to live my life in a
way where all I did was break and
never fix it so you're living in a house
where everything is broken whereas now I
still break things but now I clean up
the mess
and oh like
all of a sudden the house is better
what is your process for
when there's a need for repair but
um you feel that it wasn't you it was
somebody else's
um error but or potential error so you
um very humbly uh Express how you go
about repairing
um your your errors
um but what about situations where
um a loved one A co-worker you feel
screwed up or wronged you right as many
people do we all do from time to time
feel this way
um do you approach them uh and try and
repair the situation because there's a
little bit less or far less control when
um you know than the situation you
described and by the way the situation
you describe I think is a perfect one
because
um
I think uh we all screw up and so the
answer to this second question is sort
of the answer to the first which is if
everyone did what you were doing the
world would be truly a far better place
but not everyone's doing what you're
doing so if somebody if you feel wronged
um
assuming that wrong was it you know
wasn't a sociopathically motivated what
is your process for going about
repairing a relationship fracture like
that
again this assumes that this is a
relationship that matters right so in
every interaction you're you're only
really able to optimize around one thing
and you have to decide is this one thing
that I'm optimizing around the
relationship or is it the outcome
I mean there are other things to
optimize around but you understand that
those are different right and maybe you
could elaborate on that a little bit I
think I get it but but flesh right out
of it if I'm at the uh if I'm at the
market and I'm trying if I'm if I'm
trying to buy a new car
and I'm sitting there talking to the car
salesman
uh that's a relationship that's an
interaction
now I want to buy this car for as little
as possible and he wants to sell the car
for as much as possible
well in that interaction my relationship
with him means nothing let's assume I
don't know this guy and he's not like my
best friend
I'm optimizing everything around the
outcome so everything I do in
negotiating and in interacting with him
personally is based on getting the best
outcome
for me
it's very selfish right nothing wrong
with that by the way he's doing the same
right exactly but now for example
pretend that you are the car salesman
you're one of my closest friends
and it's your dealership like it's your
money like it's you know you can't sell
this thing to me at a loss I don't want
you to do that because I I want you to
be able to make money and similarly like
you care about me and you don't want me
to overpay for this so now we're
negotiating and we're both trying to
optimize for an outcome but there our
relationship also matters
it's a very different negotiation at
that point
and so
I think
I always try to ask myself this question
when I'm having some interpersonal
conflict which is what am I optimizing
for
so
you know if I'm having a quarrel with my
wife
I have to remind myself that the outcome
is
the objective or outcome is not
necessarily the top priority
you know being right all the time which
is my default State it's just to be a
bull in a china shop it's to be
authoritarian instead of authoritative
and that's that doesn't work if the
relationship matters
so to answer your question the first
thing I'm going to ask myself if I'm
trying if I feel slighted is what is the
nature of the relationship
is it even worth trying to do something
about this
and presumably you're asking the
question because the lens is yes this is
someone who you
you care about more than in just a
transactional way
you know usually what I've realized is I
can't try to approach the situation
without fully understanding myself and
that takes a while
so generally and this is where you know
I still
one to two times a week I'm still
working with a therapist I have to kind
of
try to figure it out on my own and then
usually bounce it off a therapist and
say well
I think this is why I'm upset about this
I think that when this person did this
or said this I felt this
first of all am I
am I correct in what I felt because
remember sometimes you might
at least for me this was the case I
would just feel anger in response to
every interaction
but what I didn't realize was that anger
was really just another emotion that was
superimposed on top of hurt or
superimposed on top of fear or
superimposed on top of shame or
superimposed on top of something else
but I didn't know how to articulate any
of those other emotions so the only
thing I could really articulate was
anger so if anger is the only thing I
know and anger is the only response I
see it's not very helpful it's not very
insightful
so that's that's a big part of it is
being able to deconstruct what I'm
feeling
oh what I really feel is loss or what I
really feel is abandonment right now
and that sometimes takes a while to
figure out at least for me like I I'm
still
you know I'm only a few years into this
journey and maybe other people figured
these things out when they were in their
20s and so they're veterans they can do
this more more naturally
but that's step one if I don't really
understand what's going on I can't even
begin to try to approach this person to
say this is how I feel
um
this is you know how do you feel and and
what are we optimizing for in this
interaction
well I
I certainly know you are not alone in
this this sense that it's a process and
it takes a lot of time and
um and on a case-by-case basis can take
a lot of time to figure out you know
exactly what one is feeling I think it
really
um goes back to the the coarseness of
language as a way to sort one's feelings
it was actually your other because we
mentioned Paul Conti who is one of your
um Stanford Medical School
um uh classmates but another previous
guest on this podcast who was also a one
of your medical school classmates um Dr
Carl diceroth right psychiatrist and
bioengineer of phenomenal um stature and
doing amazing things in the world who
said you know most of the time we have
no idea how other people feel even
though we think we do and most of the
time we don't even know how we feel I
mean our ability to really know what
we're really feeling is terrible
um and yet we recognize the the broad
the broad bins I'm pissed off I'm super
happy I'm relaxed I'm tired I mean just
think about how coarse that uh that
language is for that for all the nuance
and all the underlying things conscious
and subconscious it could be driving an
emotional state it's really it's really
quite unbelievable yeah beyond the
valence that was you know positive
versus negative that was about the
extent of my emotional language until
you know somewhat recently
well it strikes me you've come a very
long way maybe you could share with us a
little bit about what you learned on
these um what you called Retreats or um
I mean in in the book chapter you
describe
um deliberately going off to uh a
treatment center
multiple treatment centers over time to
really drill into this process of
understanding oneself better and how
one's current state of emotional
processing and emotional stability are
influencing relationships and the key
importance of that what was there any
kind of overriding um theme for you for
instance could you trace back to
specific events or themes of childhood
that made a lot of it make sense
um or is it um far more uh nuanced than
that
well you know the first thing I would
say is I wish I could tell you that this
was a very
um deliberate and wonderful choice that
I just decided I'm going to go on a
little you know self-healing Journey but
unfortunately that was not the case in
both cases in 2017 and in 2020
um I've vert I I was as close to having
no choice in the matter as one can have
so uh both of these experiences
represented
um total Rock Bottom moments in my life
so these would have been the two lowest
points in my life uh for different
reasons but but they were nevertheless
the two absolute low points in my life
and
I would say you know in the first
instance
I
I guess I could have chosen not to go
but
um I would have lost everything that
mattered in my life at that point
um and I had you know our good friend
Paul Conte basically telling me
um that I needed to do this that I
really needed to do this
and in the second situation
though completely different
circumstances you might think how can
one person in just a span of three years
find themselves in in a situation where
they almost without having any choice in
the matter have to go away uh to a place
where you're you're basically locked up
without a phone for
you know three weeks and you're doing
12 to 13 hours of therapy a day so
nothing about this was was something I
wanted to do nothing about this was
pleasant
um I would describe these as the most
difficult things I've ever done in my
life bar none and I've done some
difficult things in my life but they've
always been physically difficult I love
doing physically difficult things but
this was emotionally
the equivalent of for me
um you know climbing K2 and swimming the
English Channel in the same month you
know something that just I could you
couldn't fathom
um
so so with that said yes I learned a lot
and I learned that
people like me can be overly analytical
and
that that hyper analytical nature
can
Lead You astray when you think that your
intellect is giving you a fact-based
explanation for a set of circumstances
and you rationalize them away
well this happened to me when I was a
kid
but you know like I get it and it's not
really a problem and as a result of that
you know
it's uh it's these are actually some
positive things that came out of that
experience and and and I think the real
aha moment
in my journey which occurred
um
on a day that I remember very well was
the day I finally dropped that I dropped
that
um that rationalization and I allowed
myself to
experience what a child would experience
in that moment and then understood
what the implications are for a child
going through
these things
and
I think that was it was really the first
time in my life I ever accepted
emotionally something that I had
intellectually always said yeah it
doesn't really matter I mean it's just
you know that's just life and those
things happen and
lots of worse things happen to lots of
people and that's okay
um and I think
it it's not that once I emotionally
accepted this
I became a victim it wasn't at all it
just finally allowed me to realize oh I
can let that go now like I don't have to
I don't have to
I don't have to be a slave to the
adaptations that came from that I can I
can I can surrender
that's um
beautiful and um and inspiring to me I
think that um
yeah there's this uh incredible ability
that the human brain has to script a
story and to compare it to other
people's circumstances and as you said
you know rationalize what are
essentially emotional traumas of or
physical traumas
um from the perspective of the adult but
if I know one thing for sure and I make
it very clear I'm not a clinician but is
that the brain doesn't discard of any
circuitry we repurpose the same
circuitry we used as children as as
adults and so the ability to go back to
that and to and to parse it but as you
as you point out not from uh from an
intellectual standpoint standpoint but
from an emotional standpoint seems to be
the the really hard work
do you do that on a regular basis no not
not at all um it's been done a handful
of times
um it's been
exhausting it's it's very difficult it's
it's it's
uh
I I don't know if this is the right way
I would almost describe it as
emotionally violent
um
and it's
it's not something I need to revisit
often truthfully I think that um
yeah I I it's um it's it's been done a
finite number of times and
I think I've captured so much so much
value from it that that there are lots
of other things I continue to do I mean
I you know I
I
use a system called dialectical
behavioral therapy that is a regular
part of the therapy that I do
um but I don't have to go back to
my childhood I don't have to go back to
uncovering and and re-exploring a lot of
that stuff
um I I I've I've learned the lessons and
now it's really about practicing the
skills I know I know what I want now and
I and I know you know you talk about
plasticity I'll share one example which
I know I wrote about in the book but but
just for for folks listening that you'll
appreciate
so
I you know just one of the one of the
Hallmarks of my existence has always
been
you know just a a an insane amount of
anger and rage it's it's been there as
long as I've known so I don't have a
conscious memory of not having rage
right so earliest memories of life when
I'm five years old
I have rage like you can't believe and
it's it's a problem all my life so as a
teenager if I go more than two weeks
without punching a hole in the wall of
our house it's a miracle I mean I am so
good at drywall you can't believe how
good I am for all the stuff I have to
repair around our house like I'm
breaking Windows I'm breaking it just
doesn't like I just and so in a way and
and of course I rationalized how much
boxing saved my life because I had this
amazing outlet for my rage right if you
I got to basically exercise six hours a
day I'm hitting punching bags in people
all day long and it's just a beautiful
outlet that keeps me out of jail
um
and a big part of that rage was inward
right so it's it it's not rocket science
to understand that a person who has that
much hatred for everyone has an enormous
amount for themselves and so one of the
things I didn't realize was happening
was what my inner monologue was because
you can appreciate your inner monologue
is
so
frequent and ubiquitous and present that
it's easy to almost forget that it's
there I mean that's the that's the
that's the sort of uh dangerous part
about it right is kind of the you know
the David Foster Wallace this is water
thing the fish are swimming through
water
it the water is everywhere they don't
even realize they're in water you don't
unrealize you don't realize the
subconscious stream of thoughts that
constantly flow
but eventually I became aware of just
what that self-talk was
and
it is it was no longer the case it was
the angriest the most violent self-talk
you can imagine I mean it was like
there is no mistake that I could make
that was anything other than my perfect
perfect standard that didn't result in
what I would call my inner Bobby Knight
going ballistic
so it just didn't matter like it it's it
sounds silly under it didn't matter if I
didn't perfectly cook a steak if I
didn't perfectly nail something I was
doing if if I didn't do anything that
was perfect at what I described as match
grade perfect
I mean I would want to
beat myself to a pulp and I would scream
at myself I mean it just
it's again it's hard to describe and I
hope that most people listening to this
don't understand what that feels like
well it became very clear that that had
to change
because when you are
when you are that when you hate yourself
that much by definition you are going to
be an insufferable prick to everybody
else like because you're you're just
that's going to spill into how you
interact with the world
so
I you know was working with a therapist
who was one of the people who was
sending me to this place in Arizona and
basically it became clear that you know
they they they they they they proposed
that I could shed this trait
if I was willing to do a certain amount
of work
and I was like there's no chance
like I'm 47 years old this is the only
way I've ever interacted with myself how
in the world could this be undone it
would take another 40 years to undo this
and they're like no no here's this
exercise you're gonna do
so the exercise was
every single time I did something
where I would have that self-talk
I would have to immediately stop myself
and
pretend that it wasn't me that just did
that but it was one of my closest
friends
and instead I would audibly speak to
that person there was nobody else there
but speak to that person as though
they are the one that made the mistake
and I were to I was to record that on my
phone
so if I'm out there shooting my bow and
arrow and I'm don't get a bullseye
instead of screaming at myself I have to
say oh imagine it's my buddy Jr who just
missed that shot what would I say to him
pick up the phone or you know pull out
the phone
and say
of course something different and of
course what I would say in that
situation was much Kinder I mean
infinitely Kinder it's like from saying
it to my closest friend I'm gonna say it
in a very kind way
and I had to take a copy of that audio
and text it to my therapist oh wow yeah
talk about so can you imagine I was all
on board this practice until you
mentioned that at which point and I
trust my therapist uh um to a very deep
level but I thought wow that that's a
that's a mountain well this you know
this poor person got a lot of text
messages a lot a lot of audio files
but here's the part that just blows my
mind
only took
I don't know I can't remember exactly
I'd have to go back to look at my
journals it only took about four months
to get rid of Bobby Knight
like you know again we we had kind of a
mental model for what this looked like
which was Bobby Knight was the chairman
of the board he sat in the boardroom and
nobody else got to talk and for those
that don't know Bobby Knight had a
terrible temper yeah yeah the worst
right this is the guy that was throwing
chairs across the basketball court level
11. yep out of 10. and
and all of a sudden like we got to the
point where Bobby Knight is not even in
the boardroom anymore
in fact
I as I say this today like I don't
really remember what he sounded like
it's it's amazing to me
and and I've had some really amazing
opportunities to bring him back like
it's not like I'm making fewer mistakes
right it's not like I'm
better today than I was three years ago
at all the things that I do I'm not I'm
actually probably worse in many regards
uh but the difference is
you know I can communicate with myself
I I think I can say this I think I can
say lovingly right and and
maybe not as lovingly as some people can
I still think I'm probably
maybe just a little higher standard with
myself than maybe I need to be at times
but but I'm just not beating myself up
like I used to and I think by extension
I'm beating other people up a lot less
well I don't know the extent to which
your internal narrative reflects the
narrative that others have about you but
first of all I want to thank you for
sharing
um what you just shared I think as a
practical step it it um first of all
it's one I've never heard of before
um but certainly represents this
incredible phenomenon of neuroplasticity
because four months sounds like a bit of
time and yet you were 47 years old
that's 47 years of accumulated
um just absolutely berating self-talk is
what it sounds like
um
so it's something that people can can
think about for their own for their own
purposes
um and their own challenges also you
know I've read the book twice now and
and love it as as I put in my
endorsement of it um I think it's not
just informative but it's indeed
important because it centers on so many
of the key actionable items related to
vital Health span and lifespan Vitality
longevity whatever people want to call
these things that
are essential but also this the section
on emotional health is was
um absolutely profound for me it
inspired a huge number of changes
um and the book as a whole represents a
very important contribution to everybody
there are numerous points and I would
say every chapter is applicable to
everybody and they're very few books out
there like that
um so I want to thank you for that and
especially for including the section on
emotional health and especially for
sharing what you did today because I
think it doesn't just take a bit of
vulnerability but a ton of vulnerability
and humility to be able to share what
you just shared
and my only request or wish is that you
also hopefully internalize it the
tremendous gift that you're giving
everybody through
coming on podcasts like this doing your
own podcasts writing the book you know I
look out on the landscape of um
front-facing public-facing
um Health out there and you sit not
alone but in a unique stance as the the
medical doctor that I do believe that
people trust the very most because of
the fact that you have that intense
rigor you're I wouldn't even say your
desire your um absolute obsession with
measurement and and precision many of
the things that a moment ago you were
pointing to as as potentially you know
hazards for your emotional life but that
serve all of us the general public
um so preciously and so with it just
incalculable value so I hope that
internalizes as well maybe it'll even
weave into your self-top maybe I need to
send you a script every day but in all
seriousness I also want to thank you for
taking the time today and
um even though it's a personal thing I
really want to thank you for your
um
being an amazing colleague to me in the
podcast space in the in the health and
Medicine space whatever that is and also
um just an incredible friend you've been
a tremendous source of support and
guidance in every one of the domains
that we talked about today and many more
and again I just want to say that this
emotional health component I I agree
with you I think it's um it's not just
vital I think it's it's the the most
vital of all of them so
um you've just made
numerous important contributions and I'm
just want to thank you for sharing you
clearly put everything you have into
everything you do so thank you Peter
Andrew thank you I really appreciate you
uh making the time for us to sit down
and talk in a long form way which I
enjoy and
um yeah it's it's an it's an honor and
it means a lot to me that you have read
it twice and that you've appreciated it
and and uh and praised uh praise that as
you have thank you
thank you once again for joining me for
today's discussion with Dr Peter attia I
hope you learned as much and enjoyed the
conversation as much as I did please
also check out Dr Tia's new book which
is releasing on March 28 2023 entitled
outlive the science and art of Longevity
if you're learning from and or enjoying
this podcast please subscribe to our
YouTube channel that's a terrific zero
cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on both
apple and Spotify and on both apple and
Spotify you can also leave us up to a
five-star review if you have questions
for us or comments about the podcast or
topics you'd like me to cover or guests
that you'd like me to include on the
huberman Lab podcast please put those in
the comments section on YouTube I do
read all the comments in addition please
check out the sponsors mentioned at the
beginning and throughout today's episode
that's the best way to support this
podcast on various episodes of The
huberman Lab podcast we discuss
supplements while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody many people
derive tremendous benefit from them for
things like improving sleep supporting
hormone owns improving focus and so on
the huberman Lab podcast is proud to
have partnered with momentous
supplements if you'd like to see the
supplements discussed on the huberman
Lab podcast you can go to live momentous
spelled ous live momentous.com huberman
if you're not already following me on
social media it's huberman lab on
Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin
and at all of those places I cover
science and science-based tools some of
which overlap with the contents of the
huberman Lab podcast but much of which
is distinct from the content covered on
the huberman Lab podcast again it's
huberman lab on all social media
platforms if you haven't already
subscribed to the huberman Lab podcast
neural network newsletter it's a monthly
newsletter that includes free tool kits
things like toolkit for sleep how to
enhance the quality and duration of your
sleep toolkit for Focus toolkit for
neuroplasticity toolkit for deliberate
cold exposure heat exposure and
summaries of podcast episodes all of
those toolkits can be found by going to
hubermanlab.com go to the menu scroll
down to newsletter and simply give us
your email we do not share your email
with anybody and again the newsletters
and toolkits are completely zero cost
and you will also find some PDF examples
of previous toolkits again that's
hubermanlab.com thank you once again for
joining me for today's discussion with
Dr Peter attia and last but certainly
not least thank you for your interest in
science
[Music]