welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday life
I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at
Stanford school of medicine today my
guest is Dr Gina Poe Dr Gina Poe is a
professor in the department of
Integrative biology and Physiology at
the University of California Los Angeles
her laboratory and research focuses on
the relationship between sleep and
learning in particular how specific
patterns of brain activity that are
present during specific phases of sleep
impact our ability to learn and remember
specific types of information for
instance procedural information that is
how to perform specific cognitive or
physical tasks as well as encoding of
emotional memories and discarding
emotional memories indeed her research
focuses on how specific phases of sleep
can act as its own form of trauma
therapy discarding the emotional tones
of memories in addition her laboratory
focuses on how specific phases of sleep
impact things like the release of growth
hormone growth hormone of course plays
critical roles in metabolism and tissue
repair including brain tissue repair and
therefore has critical roles in vitality
and Longevity today you will learn many
things about the relationship between
sleep learning emotionality and growth
hormone one basic but very important
takeaway that you'll learn about today
which was news to me is that it's not
just the duration and depth of your
sleep that matter but actually getting
to sleep at relatively the same time
each night ensures that you get adequate
growth hormone release in the first
hours of sleep in fact if you require
let's say eight hours of sleep per night
but you go to sleep two hours later than
your typical bedtime On Any Given night
you actually miss the window for growth
hormone release that's right
getting growth hormone release in sleep
which is absolutely critical to our
immediate and long-term health is not a
prerequisite of getting sleep even if we
are getting enough sleep as Dr Poe
explains their critical brain circuit
and endocrine that is hormone circuits
that regulate not just the duration and
depth and quality and timing of sleep
but when we place our bout of sleep that
is when we go to sleep each night plus
or minus about a half hour or so
strongly dictates whether or not we will
experience all the health promoting
including mind promoting benefits of
sleep today's episode covers that and a
lot more in substantial detail you will
learn for instance how to use sleep in
order to optimize learning as well as
forgetting for those things that you
would like to forget so during today's
episode Dr Gina Poe shares critical
information about not just Neuroscience
but physiology and the hormone systems
of the brain and body that strongly
inform mental health physical health and
performance so by the end of today's
episode you'll be far more informed
about sleep and how it works the
different roles it performs and you'll
have several new actionable steps that
you can take in order to improve your
mental health physical health and
performance before we begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at
Stanford it is however part of my desire
and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need and nothing you
don't that means plenty of salt
magnesium and potassium the so-called
electrolytes and no sugar the
electrolytes are critical to the
function of every cell in your body in
particular the neurons the nerve cells
as I've talked about before on this
podcast neurons nerve cells require
adequate sodium and potassium as well as
magnesium in order to fire Action
potentials which are the electrical
signals that allow neurons to do
everything from generate focus and
attention allow you to learn and
generate neuromuscular connection and
allow you to exercise or train or do any
kind of skilled activity with a high
degree of output I take element about
two or three times per day typically
once in the morning and again after or
during my bout of exercise each day and
sometimes an additional one if I've sat
in a hot sauna and sweat a lot or if the
weather is very hot if you'd like to try
element you can go to drink element
that's lmnt.com huberman to claim a free
element sample pack with your purchase
again that's drink element lmnt.com
huberman to claim a free sample pack
today's episode is also brought To Us by
Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses
and pillows that are the absolute
highest quality now sleep is the
foundation of mental health physical
health and performance when we are
sleeping well all of those things Excel
and when we are not sleeping well all of
those things suffer now the surface that
you sleep on that is the mattress that
you sleep on is critical and Helix
understands that everybody has slightly
different sleep needs so if you were to
go to the Helix site which I invite you
to do and take their brief two minute
quiz it will match your body type and
sleep preferences to the perfect
mattress for you it will ask you
questions for instance
do you sleep on your back or your side
or your stomach do you tend to run hot
or cold during the night or maybe you
don't know the answers to those
questions I went and took the Sleep quiz
at Helix and it matched me to the
so-called dusk mattress dusk I started
sleeping on Dust mattress over a year
ago and it's the best sleep that I've
ever had it's completely transformed the
depth and duration and quality of my
sleep in ways that make me feel far
better during the daytime if you're
interested in upgrading your mattress
you can go to helixsleep.com huberman
take their two-minute sleep quiz and
they'll match you to a customized
mattress and you'll get up to 350 off
any mattress order and two free pillows
again if interested go to Helix
sleep.com huberman for up to 350 off and
two free pillows today's episode is also
brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep
makes Smart mattress covers with cooling
Heating and sleep tracking capacity now
again sleep is the foundation of mental
health physical health and performance
but what many people don't realize is
that in order to fall and stay asleep
your core body temperature has to drop
by about one to three degrees
conversely in order to wake up each
morning and feel refreshed your body
temperature actually has to increase by
one to three degrees therefore
controlling the temperature of your
sleeping environment is absolutely key
with eight sleep that's very easy to do
depending on whether or not you
typically run too cold or too hot during
the night you can program your eight
Sleep mattress cover so that it's the
optimal temperature not just for you but
for each phase the early middle and late
phase of your sleep and for waking up in
the morning in fact you can even control
the temperature of your eight Sleep
mattress cover differentially across the
mattress if you're sleeping alongside
somebody else if you'd like to try eight
sleep you can go to eightsleep.com
huberman and check out their pod Pro
cover and save 150 at checkout eight
sleep currently ships in the USA Canada
UK and select countries in the EU and
Australia again that's eightsleep.com
huberman to save 150 at checkout the
huberman Lab podcast is now partnered
with momentous supplements to find the
supplements we discussed on the huberman
Lab podcast you can go to live momentous
spelled ous live momentous.com huberman
I should just mention that the library
of those supplements is constantly
expanding again that's livemomentous.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Dr Gina Poe Dr Gino Poe welcome thank
you I've really been looking forward to
this conversation because I'm familiar
with your work and I know that many
people are going to be excited to learn
about your work
as it relates to sleep as it relates to
problem solving creativity addiction and
craving relapse
and a number of other important topics
so to start things off I would love for
you to educate us a bit about this thing
that we are all familiar with and yet
very few of us understand which is sleep
and if you would could you describe the
various phases of sleep that exist what
distinguish them and perhaps
frame this within the context of what
would a perfect night's sleep look like
okay how long would it last more or less
and what would the biology look like
what what is a perfect night's sleep oh
yeah that's a great question all right
so sleep is really different from
wakefulness and in fact can't be
replaced by any state of wakefulness
that we've been able to come up with so
far
our brain chemistry is completely
different and in the different stages of
sleep which there are is non-rem and REM
are the two major states of sleep and
every animal we've studied so far seems
to have both of those States anyway
those two states are entirely different
from one another too and even within
non-rem there are three states stage one
which is what you slip into when you
first falling asleep it's dozing there's
kind of an interesting Rhythm that goes
on in the brain it's kind of a fast
gamma Rhythm and then there's stage two
which is a really cool State we sort of
used to ignore sleep researchers because
it was a transient State between
wakefulness and the Deep stage three
slow way sleep which is the most
impressively different and then and
between that and REM sleep so stage two
I'll talk a little bit more about and
then the Deep slow way sleep state which
is when big slow waves sweep through our
brain and now we realize that it cleans
our brain one of the things that those
big slow waves do is cleans our brain
and does other really important things
to restore us
um from a day of wakefulness and then
REM sleep which is the most popular
because that's where we have the most
active dreams and
um when you wake up someone out of REM
sleep they'll almost always report
having dreams something really bizarre
that's called REM sleep rapid eye
movement sleep so those are the four
states of sleep of human sleep and we
cycle through them every 90 minutes or
so when we go to sleep say 10 10 30 11
o'clock
our first REM sleep period comes about a
hundred and five minutes after we fall
asleep and lasts about 20 minutes
actually it comes about 95 minutes and
last 10 or 15 minutes and then we start
over again and we have about five of
those per night for a perfect night's
sleep four or five something like that
so A Perfect night's sleep is seven and
a half eight hours there was a really
great study that put people in a
semi-darkened room with nothing but the
bed for 12 hours every day for a month
and what people did initially is because
because we're in a sleep deprived nation
is that they slept a lot more than usual
like 10 or 11 hours of the 12 and then
they leveled off after a week or two to
about eight hours and 15 minutes of
sleep so you actually can't oversleep I
mean they had nothing else to do butt
sleep and they would round off to on
average eight hours and 15 minutes a
night and then to spend the rest of the
time twiddling their thumbs humming
Tunes interesting daydreaming I want to
get back to the Contour of a perfect
night's sleep but I'm intrigued by this
idea that people can't oversleep I'm
often asked whether or not we can get
too much sleep and whether or not
sleeping too long long excuse me can
make us groggy the next day is there
anything to that
um and how does one determine how long
they should sleep right on average on
average yeah well that's interesting
because different people need seem to
need different amounts of sleep but we
don't really even know exactly what
sleep is for
so what they need is you know kind of
it's
it's you know Mercury murky
um so we do know a lot of things that
sleep does now for us but we don't know
how long those things take so how long
we need to sleep is also just a big
question mark but some people don't feel
rested until they've slept nine hours
and some people don't feel rested after
three or four and a half but most people
if they consistently deprive themselves
of sleep so that they're only sleeping
four four and a half hours a night build
up a cognitive deficit that just builds
up over time the more nights you have
with sleep deprivation the more
cognitive deficit you have and so you
need sleep again to sleep more to
recover now the question you had about
um can you over can you oversleep right
can you sleep to the point where it's
too much you know that we I growing up
um when I was in high school my
girlfriend's dad had this belief that no
one should sleep in past 6 a.m so he
would wake all the there were two
children in that home he would wake up
the kids in that house he had to sing
Against over sleeping regardless of when
people went went to sleep and I always
thought that was um an interesting
mentality yeah
um that's not terrible actually because
what that will do is it'll put you make
you sleepier the next night to get to
bed on time so it'll build up your
homeostatic need if you wake up too
early but
um so I don't think you can oversleep
but people who sleep a lot like people
who sleep over nine hours it's probably
indicative of some other problem because
in fact if you have a lot of different
conditions it will cause you to sleep a
lot more probably because what it does
is it interferes with your efficient
sleep the efficiency of your sleep so if
you find yourself sleep being
consistently nine hours plus every night
then you might want to consult a doctor
about maybe what else it might be it
could be cancer it could be sleep apnea
that just affects a lot of people it
could be that your sleep is super
inefficient because you're snoring a lot
more than you know or you're waking up a
lot more than you know every night so
you might want to sleep study just to
see how your sleep is and then see what
else might be causing you to sleep so
much and that wouldn't be if somebody is
sleeping nine or ten hours you know
every once in a while you mean if
they're consistently sleeping for more
than nine hours they feel like they need
it in order to function cognitively the
next day it might be that your sleep is
just not efficient and you might want to
look into why that that's the case
interesting forgive me for the anecdote
but I can't resist years ago I went to
an acupuncturist and um he gave me these
red pills of which I don't know what
they contain uh-oh but I took them
because he told me they would help with
my sleep and I would fall asleep about
30 minutes after taking them and I would
have incred incredibly excuse me vivid
dreams
and I'd wake up four or five hours after
having gone to sleep feeling completely
rested something that I've never really
experienced interesting on a consistent
basis I want to do mass spec on these
pills I still have no idea what was in
them whatsoever
exactly some people have thought that
perhaps they had GHB gamma
hydroxybutyrate which is by the way an
illegal drug it can kill you it's not a
not something you want to take
um but anyway if if ever someone can
figure out what the red pills were I'll
be very um and this is not a red pill of
the of the other sort red pill this is
just the red sleep pills interesting I
mean it could have been even a placebo
effect because Placebo is extremely
strong so although I I don't know there
was really something to these red pills
so shout out to the acupuncturists and
uh and the Eastern medicine
um but to return this I to this idea of
the architecture of a perfect night's
sleep so you said
um we fall asleep the first 90 minutes
of sleep
REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep will
arrive at about 95 minutes in does that
mean that the rest of that 90 minutes is
consumed with slow wave sleep yeah
non-rem sleep okay and what about the
Sleep where we are lightly asleep and we
might have a dream that has us somehow
thinking about movement or that we jolt
ourselves away because that often
happens early in the night yeah yeah
that's the first stage stage one and
stage two of sleep and stage two sleep
is really cool because
that has something called sleep spindles
and K complexes and what sleep spindles
are are a little bit of activity that's
10 to 15 Hertz in frequency it's a
conversation between the thalamus and
the cortex so the thalamus is the
gateway to Consciousness and the
neocortex you know processes all our
cognition and
um so it's it's these
spindles they're called sleep spindles
and if you wake up out of that state you
will often report a dream like a
hallucination style dream it won't be a
long dream report like you have out of
REM sleep but it will be some
hallucination state enduring while we're
falling asleep one of the reasons we
call it falling asleep is because in
stage one and stage two our muscles are
relaxing and if there's part of our
brain that's conscious enough to sort of
recognize that relaxation will feel like
we're falling and will jerk awake so
often that hallucination it's called
hypnagotic hallucination will feel like
it'll include some falling aspect that
will wake up out of that's really
interesting to me I've long felt that
sensation of almost like dropping back
into my head
um so much so that if I elevate my feet
just slightly and I tilt my head back
just slightly in order to go to sleep I
find that I fall asleep much faster
interesting but it does feel as if I'm
going to fall like almost gonna do a
backward somersault I actually really
like the the sensation and usually
because it proceeds falling deeply yeah
that's really interesting I'm somebody
has to do a study of elevated feet and
yeah there's a little bit on um body
position and sleep and some of the
washout that we'll talk about so early
in the night
um you got these lighter stages of sleep
less rapid eye movement sleep what can
we say about the dreams that occur
during the say first and second
um you know 90 minute cycles of sleep
are they quite different than the
patterns of sleep and dreaming that
occur later in the night or toward
morning well okay that's an interesting
question there's a lot of facets to it
there is some evidence that the first
four hours of sleep are very important
for memory processing and in fact
if you've learned something new that day
or have experienced a new sensory motor
experience then your early sleep dreams
will incorporate that experience much
more than the later sleep dreams later
as that memory gets Consolidated from
the early structures which are the
hippocampus deep in the temporal lobe to
the cortex in a distributed fashion that
memory seems to move from that
hippocampus to the cortex and also the
dreams that incorporate that memory also
move later in the night so
nobody knows why but it does there was a
great study by siddarta Ribeiro who
studied the consolidation of memories
from the cortex from the hippocampus to
the cortex in a rat across the period of
a full day sleep because rats sleep in
the daytime and he found that each
subsequent Rim sleep period moved that
memory a from the hippocampus to the
first first area that projects to it and
then the second area and then the third
area and you can see the memory moving
um through the throughout the Sleep cool
period yeah very cool so you have to
read that study so
um there's a number of different
hormones associated with the different
stages of sleep we know that melatonin
is a hormone of nighttime of nighttime
that makes a sleepy
um what about growth hormone release
when does that occur during sleep so
growth hormone release happens all day
long and all night long but the Deep
slow way sleep that you get the very
first sleep cycle is when you get a big
bolus of growth hormone release and in
men and women equally and if you miss
that first deep slow way sleep period
you also miss that big bolus of growth
hormone release and you might get
ultimately across the day just as much
overall growth hormone release but
endocrinologists will tell you that big
boluses do different things than a
little bit eeked out over time so that
is well we know there's also a big
push to synthesize proteins so that's
when
the protein synthesis part that builds
memories for example in our brain
happens in that first cycle of sleep so
you don't want to miss that especially
if you've learned something really big
and needs needs more synaptic space to
encode it how would somebody miss that
first 90 minutes driving themselves yeah
so so let's say I normally go to sleep
at 10 pm
and then from 10 to 11 30 would be this
first phase of sleep and that's when the
growth hormone big bolus of growth
hormone would be released does that mean
that if I go to sleep instead at 11 30
or midnight that I miss that first phase
of sleep why is it not the case that I
get that first phase of sleep just
simply starting later it is a beautiful
clock that we have in our body that
knows when things should happen and it's
every cell in our body has a clock and
all those clocks are normally
synchronized and the Circadian clocks
are synchronized and so our cells are
ready to respond onto that growth
hormone release at a particular time and
if we miss it and it's a time in
relation to melatonin also so if you
miss it yeah you might get some growth
hormone release but it's occurring at a
time when that your clock has already
moved to the next phase and so it's it's
just a clock thing yeah I don't think we
can overstate the importance of what you
just described and to be honest despite
knowing a bit about the Sleep research
and circadian biology this is the very
first time that I've ever heard this
that if you normally go to sleep at a
particular time and growth hormone is
released in that first phase of sleep
that you can't simply initiate your
sleep bout later and expect to capture
that first phase of sleep yeah that's
incredible and I think important and
um as many listeners are probably
realizing also highly actionable so what
this means is that we should have fairly
consistent bedtimes in addition to
fairly consistent wait times is that
right exactly and in fact one of the
best markers of good neurological health
when we get older is consistent bedtimes
wow okay
um I don't want to backtrack but I did
write down something that I think is
important for me to resolve or for you
to resolve so I'm going to ask this um
people that sleep nine hours or more
perhaps that reflecting an issue some
underlying issue perhaps is being a
teenager or an adolescent and undergoing
a stage of of development where there's
a lot of bodily and brain growth in
exception to that because yes I don't
recall sleeping a ton when I was a
teenager I had a ton of energy but I
know a few teenagers and they sleep a
lot yeah like they'll just sleep and
sleep and sleep and sleep should we let
them sleep and sleep and sleep okay I
can sleep okay so that's the one
exception what about just like babies
okay when you're developing something in
your brain or the rest of your body you
really need sleep to help organize that
I mean sleep is doing really hard work
in organizing our brains and and making
it develop right and if we deprive
ourselves of sleep we will actually also
just I like like I said we have a daily
clock we also have a developmental clock
and we can miss a developmental window
if we don't let ourselves sleep extra
like we need to
what other things inhibit growth hormone
release or other components of this
first stage of sleep in other words if I
go to sleep religiously every night at
10 pm are there things that I perhaps do
in the preceding hours or the preceding
day like ingest caffeine or alcohol that
can make that first stage of sleep less
effective even if I'm going to sleep at
the same time alcohol definitely will do
that because alcohol is a REM sleep
suppressant and it even suppresses some
of that stage two transition to REM with
those sleep spindles and those sleep
spindles we didn't talk about their
function yet but they're really
important for moving memories to our
cortex it's a unique time when our
hippocampus the sort of like the ram of
our brains writes it to a hard disk and
which is the cortex and there it's a
unique time when they're connected so if
you don't want to miss that you don't
want to miss REM sleep when is also a
part of the consolidation process and
schema changing process and alcohol in
there you know before before we go to
sleep we'll do that until we've
metabolized alcohol and put it out of
our bodies it will affect our sleep
badly so probably fair to say no
ingestion of alcohol within the four to
six hours preceding sleep given the
half-life or at all or at all would be
better but I know some people refuse to
go that way and maybe a little bit is
okay I don't know what the dose response
is but um there are studies out there
you can look at great yeah
so we're still in the first stage of
sleep and I apologize for slowing us
down but it sounds like it's an
incredibly important
first phase of sleep what about the
second and third 90 minute blocks of
sleep is there anything that makes those
um unique what is their signature uh
besides the fact that they come second
and third in the night there's more and
more REM sleep the later the night we
get
um there's also a change in hormones you
know the growth hormone and melatonin
levels are starting to decline but other
hormones are picking up so it is a
really different stage that you also
don't want to shortchange yourself on
and I think that's the stage many
studies are showing that those are the
times in sleep when the most creativity
can happen that's when our dreams can
incorporate and put together old and new
things together into a new way and
um and our schema are built during that
time so
um yeah we can change our minds best
during those phases of sleep could you
elaborate a little bit more on schema no
one I don't think anyone on this podcast
has ever discussed schema I'm a little
bit familiar with schema from my courses
on psychology but it's been a while so
maybe you could just refresh your mind
and everyone well it's it's still a
concept
right I think of schema as
um
like we have a schema of Christmas right
we we have all kinds of ideas that we
sew together and call Christmas a
holiday season in the northern
hemisphere it's cold we have Santa Claus
and reindeer and jingle bells and even
things that are false that that we
normally associate with Christmas
presents family gathering when it is all
of this stuff is sewn together until one
there's a thread linking them all and we
can just give ourselves a list of words
and
um and none of them contain the word
Christmas and then ask people later
um you know give them another list of
words and include the word Christmas and
they'll say oh yeah that word was there
because in their minds they brought up
that word Christmas because it's part of
that whole schema so that's what it's
sort of a related
a lot of related Concepts I guess when I
think about it sort of like on the
desktop of my computer
um would scare some people but it's just
a ton of folders yeah but each of the
folder names means something very clear
and specific to me right and inside of
those folders are collections of things
that make sense in terms of how they're
batched is that kind of one way exactly
no that's a great way to think of it and
and when you're in REM sleep in the
later parts of the night and that
transition to REM that's when your
computer of your brain is opening
folders and comparing documents seeing
if is there anything the same these two
documents look very much the same but
there's a little bit of difference and
it can it can link those conceptually so
that that's probably one of the origins
of creativity is finding things that are
related maybe just linked a little bit
and you can find that link and
strengthen it if it you know makes your
schema interesting and different
very interesting
um many people including myself tend to
wake up maybe once during the middle of
the night to use the restroom I've tried
to drink less fluid before going to
sleep I've I've heard also that
um the impulse to urinate I forgive the
topic but a lot of people deal with this
so the impulse to urinate is also
dictated by how quickly you drink fluid
not just the total volume so I've
switched to sipping fluids more slowly
for my last beverage of the day which
seems to help but the point here is that
I think a lot of people wake up once in
the middle of the night oftentimes to
use the restroom but oftentimes just
around 3 A.M and might be up for a few
minutes hopefully not on their phone or
viewing any Bright Light which can cause
more wakefulness but then go back to
sleep
is there any known detriment to this
middle of the night waking or should we
consider it a normal feature for some
people's sleep architecture I think we
shouldn't worry about it actually I
think you know sleep is really
incredibly well homeostatically
regulated and so really don't worry
about how much you're sleeping as long
as you're not intentionally depriving
yourself of sleep by doing something
really rewarding and exciting because
even that is stressful to your body and
deprives you a lot of things we're
talking about so don't worry about it
um it's absolutely normal to wake up at
least once in the middle of the night to
go to the bathroom and as long as you
can get back to sleep in a reasonable
amount of time
um you know or even if it takes you an
hour don't worry about it as long as you
have a lifestyle that allows you to then
make up that sleep either the next
morning or the next night or going to
bed a little earlier so if I understand
correctly there's a little bit of
asymmetry to sleep that catching that
first phase of sleep it's like you
either get it or you don't and you have
to get it by going to sleep essentially
the same time each night maybe plus or
minus 15 minutes or so yeah but then if
I wake up in the middle of the night and
go back to sleep I can not catch up but
I can gather all the sleep that I would
have gotten had I just slept the whole
way through the night is that right yeah
yeah okay yeah and and we don't know
actually the answer to whether or not
the sleep in the middle between that
early sleep and the late sleep is in
fact different for another reason and
whether depriving yourself of sleep from
say one to 2 30 in the morning is bad in
a different way we don't know well I
suppose I am the experiment in that case
because I do tend to wake up once per
night and I've sort of come to recognize
it as part of my normal sleep
architecture I don't obsess over it I do
notice that when I go back to sleep and
especially toward mourning that my sleep
is incredibly deep my dreams are
incredibly Vivid I don't always remember
them but what is unique perhaps about
the architecture of dreams and sleep in
the let's say the last third of the
night or this or the second half of the
night right yeah the second half of the
night we have longer REM sleep periods
and those are considered the deepest
sleep even though slow wave sleep big
slow wave is considered deep it is deep
yeah they call slow wave sleep deep
sleep and REM sleep rapid I mean but now
you're telling me that REM sleep is
actually the deeper sleep okay there
needs to be a new nomenclature sleep
researchers
no no please the reason why you cause
slow wave sleep deep sleep is because
it's difficult to arouse people out of
that state and when you do arouse them
out of that state they are most often
confused and just want to go back into
sleep and can go back pretty easily if
you arouse someone out of REM sleep
they're more likely to report something
that was really kind of almost like
wakefulness it was so vivid but in fact
if you give someone
and none
threatening kind of stimulation like
somebody dropping keys or a ping or
something like that instead of waking
that same volume will wake someone up
out of non-rim sleep but out of REM
sleeping instead lengthen the amount of
time or make it even more dense and your
rapid eye movements more dense and often
people will incorporate that sound into
their dreams so the body and brain are
somehow conscious of the
um of the sound and I've heard also
smells can even make it into our dreams
and REM sleep but that we it doesn't
arouse us it doesn't arouse us as often
yeah interesting and maybe one of the
reasons why REM sleep is deeper is
especially in adults and older people
that deep slow wave sleep goes away so
it's not as deep it's not as big the
slow waves aren't as large which is
probably problematic but we're not sure
and so then REM sleep it becomes the
deepest stage actually in children
it's kind of a toss-up because they it's
really hard to wake them up out of that
deep slow wave sleep and in fact
fire alarms don't wake them up even
really loud fire alarms out of that
state of sleep so that's why they're
trying to change fire alarms so that
instead of something that the kids don't
associate with anything like whatever
they don't associate when it says their
name or something else that may be less
loud but more Salient to them and will
wake them up I don't know having carried
sleeping children in from the car I
don't know that I want children to start
waking up from sleep because that's one
of the best things when you get home and
the kids are asleep in the back seat you
can literally throw them over your
shoulder gently of course yes and put
them to sleep in and they are completely
out yeah completely wonderful it is
wonderful one of Nature's gifts I'd like
to take a quick break and acknowledge
one of our sponsors athletic greens
athletic greens now called ag1 is a
vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
covers all of your foundational
nutritional needs I've been taking
athletic greens since 2000 and 12 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once are usually
twice a day is that it gets to be the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health
and those probiotics and athletic greens
are optimal and vital for microbiotic
health in addition athletic greens
contains a number of adaptogens vitamins
and minerals that make sure that all of
my foundational nutritional needs are
met and it tastes great if you'd like to
try athletic greens you can go to
athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll
give you five free travel packs that
make it really easy to mix up athletic
greens while you're on the road in the
car on the plane Etc and they'll give
you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2
again that's athleticreens.com huberman
to get the five free travel packs and
the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 so this
enhanced volume or or proportion of
rapid eye movement sleep in the second
half of the night relates to more
elaborate dreams we are paralyzed during
REM sleep correct yes normally it's
paralyzed and that's really good because
that's the time when we're actively
dreaming storyline dreams and we could
hurt ourselves we're actually really cut
off from the outside world in terms of
you know
responding to say this table or a window
or a door and so different from
sleepwalking which is out of slow wave
sleep out of slowly sleep that
sleepwalking is a mixture between sleep
and wakefulness so you actually will
respond to the door you can cook a full
meal drive your car while you're in deep
slowly sleep it's scary because you
never know what you're going to do you
don't have voluntary voluntary control
over it you have no conscious control
over it but you can actually safely
navigate some situations in sleepwalking
and actually have a conversation
although it may not make much sense when
you're sleep talking in REM sleep you're
not processing the outside world and
instead when you're acting out your
dreams you could be doing things like
walking through a plate glass window or
falling off of you know down the stairs
things like that so you really want your
muscles to be inactivated during REM
sleep otherwise you will act out those
dreams and really hurt yourself or your
bed partner
what about sleep talking or talking in
sleep
um I don't know how many relationships
have
um been saved by sleep talking but I'm
guessing a few have been destroyed and
I'm guessing that
um talking in sleep could have meaning
or perhaps has no meaning just as dreams
could have meaning or no meaning as we
recall them yeah do not take sleep
talking seriously no matter what people
say it doesn't necessarily reflect truth
so it's not like you're being more
truthful when you're sleep talking you
just saved a number of relationships
um I'm not directing this to anyone in
particular but I I guarantee you just
did
um noted
um so as people start to approach
mourning or the time when they normally
would wake up
I've heard that it's important
to if possible complete one of these
90-minute Cycles prior to waking up that
is if you set your alarm for halfway
through one of these 90 minute cycles
that come late in the night of sleep
that it can lead to um rather groggy
patterns of waking
um so I'll just ask you directly do you
use a an alarm clock I do not
um thankfully I'm in a line of work that
doesn't require me normally to do
anything at any particular time I'd do
it when I do it unless I have to catch a
plane and then I always set my alarm
just in case well as a fellow academic I
can tell you there are plenty of
punishing features about being an
academic scientist that um that offset
the fact that you don't have to use an
alarm clock but it is nice that you can
often set your own schedule so would you
recommend that if possible that people
not use an alarm clock yeah absolutely
if you can just listen to your body and
wake up when you need to wake up that
would be great
um
but um one of the reasons why we have
such a grogginess is called Sleep
inertia when we wake up out of the wrong
state which is
um deep slow wave sleep is because I
liken it to uh like a washing machine
cycle this 90-minute Cycles like a
washing machine cycle and and
um the first part is to add water right
and then your clothes are soaking wet
you don't want to open the washing
machine and try and function put them on
and wear them around while they're
soaking wet and full of soap so you have
to wait until the cycle is through
before you can well actually let's put
it in the dryer too before you want to
wear them so
yeah you can function it just takes a
little while for those clothes that
brain to dry out so you can actually
function well
um but it's better to wait through the
whole cycle is complete and so that's
why you want to set that 90 90 minute
alarm clock and again that's around 90
minutes because the first stage of sleep
the first cycle of sleep is actually a
little longer more like 105 110 minutes
but then the second ones and third ones
they get sort of shorter and shorter as
the night goes on and in the last few
Cycles you're just doing the N2 REM
sleep cycle which takes less time and if
you wake up out of REM sleep there's
usually no problem cognitively you're
good to go
are you a fan of of sleep trackers
uh sure yeah yeah do you use one I have
one on I don't take I don't
I don't live my life by them because
they are the best ones right now are
about 70 effective at staging your sleep
so 70 it's okay it's okay but um take it
with a grain of salt is what I'm saying
yeah I've tried various ones and I
compare the mattress based one to a I
actually wear it on my ankle instead of
my wrist but
um and I do find it informative but a um
a colleague of mine at Stanford Ali Crum
who works on mindset and belief effects
um talk to me about a study they did
where people often will buy us their
sense of daytime wakefulness based on
their sleep score more than their
subjective score in other words if they
were told they got a poor night's sleep
even if they got a great night's sleep
in the in and this was of course
measured in the sleep lab so they
they're able to compare people report
feeling more groggy and the opposite is
also true that if it says 100 or 90 on
your sleep score then people go I feel
great even though they might not have
slept well so this speaks to the I don't
want to say placebo effect but the sort
of belief effects that are woven in with
a score yeah
um so so it seems to me that combining
subjective and objective data is
probably better and I do believe that
you should trust your own physiology and
the way that your body is telling you to
feel because in fact
it used to be that people with insomnia
weren't were often not believed because
you put them in a sleep lab and they
look like they slept great and you wake
them up in the morning they say oh I
didn't sleep very well at all and that's
because probably we we just came out
with a paper that shows that
subcortical structures can be in a
completely different sleep State than
cortical structures which is what we
measure in the sleep lab what the cortex
is doing so it might be that people who
say I did not sleep all night long even
though the cortex is saying oh no you
had great sleep was because they're
they're monitoring their subcortical
hypothalamus hippocampus
Thalamus other other structures that the
sleep lab just can't access unless you
have depth electrodes which nobody
really wants right because that requires
holes in the skulls and wires yeah wow
so does that mean that the last 50 plus
years of sleep science
um it's potentially flawed in some way
because they're only recording from I
guess this would be the analogy would be
it's like recording from the surface of
the ocean as opposed to the depth of the
ocean right and trying to ascertain the
life moving down deep in there brace
yourselves uh colleagues at Stanford
sleep lab and elsewhere uh but please
just tell us because I think scientists
want to know the truth yeah
yeah for nothing that you
you want to know what the cortex is
doing I mean the cortex is really
important for a lot of things but it
doesn't necessarily tell you what a lot
of other really important parts of the
brain are doing in terms of sleep
and
um but there's hope because in fact it
would be great I think that's possible
from the paper if you look at it it's in
pnas this year that you could detect
subtle changes in the cortical EEG that
might be able to tell you what the
subcortical structures are doing things
like the absolute power in that sleep
spindle band that Sigma band would
change if the hippocampus is in REM
sleep and the cortex is in that sleep
spindle State and and vice versa so
there is some hope that we can gain from
people with depth electrodes or animals
with depth electrodes that we could
backwards machine learn what the cortex
might be able to tell us about
subcritical structures from the cortical
EEG so interesting this is going to be a
stimuli yeah stay tuned it's going to be
a stimulus for development of new
technology which is always going to
assist in scientific discovery
um there's one more thing I wanted to
ask about
the architecture of the night's sleep
um in terms of early part of the night
earlier you mentioned the washout of
debris and um the so-called lymphatic
system I think is what you're referring
to could you tell us a little bit more
about the washout that occurs in the
brain during sleep what what that is and
what roles it's thought to serve and
perhaps if there are any ways to ensure
that it happens or to ensure that it
doesn't happen and obviously we want
this to happen yeah yeah
um all right great question we talked
about the circadian clock and how
certain things happen at certain times
well one of the things that happens when
we're awake and talking to each other is
that there's a lot of plasticity there's
something that I'm learning from you
today and you're learning from me and
that changes our synapses and it changes
the way our proteins are going to be
folded and and changed during sleep
it unfolds this process actually uses a
lot of ATP the power
um structure the fuel of the brain and
it unfolds also proteins while we're
doing this while we're using them and so
during that first part of the night when
we first fall asleep in the first 20
minutes or so we're building that
adenosine back into ATP and that's
probably why power naps are called Power
naps because we're actually rebuilding
the power and then we're also
cleaning out through the Deep slow waves
of slave sleep cleaning out all those
misfolded proteins unfolded proteins and
other things that get broken down and
you know need to be rebuilt when we're
asleep because of its use during
wakefulness
so I liken that too you know having a
big party during wakefulness and you
need all those partygoers to leave in
order to do the cleanup and so what I
think the mechanism is and this is still
something to be tested is actually slow
waves themselves which is bad news for
us as we get older and those slow waves
get smaller and uh slowly sleep goes
away
so
um so what happens when a neuron is
firing is that it expands the membrane
expands a little bit becomes more
translucent that's how we know one of
the ways we know that neurons expand
when they fire and so every action
potential the membrane expands a little
bit as sodium brings water into the cell
and then when they're silent they
contract and so in during slow waves the
cool thing is that the reason why you
can measure them is that all the neurons
at the same time not all of them but a
good portion of them are firing at the
same time and Silent at the same time
and so you think about that as
Contracting and expanding all at the
same time it's kind of like a bilge pump
of the brain so that can pump out glia
are also really important for this
um in terms of cleaning up debris and
transferring it to where it needs to go
so
um so I think of it actually as a bilge
pump
cleaning out our brain
interesting I've heard about the
glymphatic system and the lymphatic
washout I've never thought about the
mechanical aspects of it before I always
thought that for some reason
that now it's obvious to me there had to
be something mechanical but only now
that you've educated me about this I
thought that for some reason the the
cerebral spinal fluid just starts
washing through but here you're talking
about literally an expansion and a
contraction of the neurons in unison and
pushing the fluid through cleaning out
any misfolded proteins or debris that
might occur yeah on the basis of these
metabolic pathways and the consequence
of that is to to what to leave the brain
in a state of
um
more pristine action for for the next
day yeah is that right yeah you think of
it again like a party and if you don't
clean up after that party you try and
hold another one the next day it's going
to get more clogged you know it's people
have a harder time moving around and
enjoying themselves and if that builds
up day after day you know it's going to
be cognition that would be the party
goers moving around
um becomes
card yeah and so this um builds pump
that you describe is associated with the
big slow waves of of um deep well of
slow wave sleep yeah um so this is going
to occur more or less in the first third
of the night is that right that's right
and um are there things that inhibit
this process and are there things that
facilitate this process yeah
yeah connected inhibit it's not to get
it
um but right and here too uh sorry it's
in trouble um but and is this similar to
the case with growth hormone where if
you go to sleep later than you would
normally you miss the washout yeah it's
not you don't delay it you miss you
missed the washer that's right that's
right so if you go to sleep at one or
two in the morning your sleep is still
going to be dominated by N2 and REM
sleep not by slow wave sleep so you need
to you need to get that first bit of
sleep would a caveat be if somebody
normally goes to sleep at one or two a.m
and wakes up at 10 A.M that if that's
their normal sleep cycle yeah
um that should be okay it should be okay
um you would probably want to do
somebody would want to do a sleep study
with people who do that normally and see
if also the Melatonin releases later and
the corticosterone rise that happens
normally in the morning also happens
later so if everything shifted good
um okay yeah there are a few studies
I've um come across that really do argue
for the fact that waking up Circa
Sunrise that doesn't mean at Sunrise but
within an hour or two maybe three hours
of sunrise and going to sleep
within four hours after sunset or so
um is actually better for the health of
all human beings than is being a night
out and the night owl there's almost
like a night owl Posse out there
especially on social media they get very
upset when you say that you should see
morning sunlight that after 10 a.m you
kind of miss the boat
um they get very upset because I think
there are about 20 or 30 percent of
people perhaps who
um who really feel like they function
better staying up late and waking up
late and they function much less well
waking up early and going to bed early
but the data on health metrics suggests
that sorry night owls that they are
wrong yeah sorry me because I'm a night
owl oh boy okay well then I'm
apologizing directly and here I'm not a
really early morning person I'm kind of
more typical if I wake up naturally
around 6 30 somewhere between 6 30 and 7
30 a.m go to sleep somewhere between
10 and 11 p.m these are averages
um but I do notice that when I force
myself to get up a little earlier and go
to sleep a little earlier
that my mood and alertness and just
overall productivity is much higher and
there could be other variables there too
absolutely right I'm a night owl I love
staying up late at night doing you know
writing grants writing papers watching
movies whatever it is I love it but I
like you and like every human being on
Earth do better if I go to bed earlier
and wake up earlier so one good thing
for night owls is to have a child
because they will wake you up their
circadian rhythms are so strong they
will wake up and even if you deprive
them of sleep in the first half of the
night they will still wake up like
clockwork because their circadian
rhythms are so strong at 6am and so what
you've you haven't done anything good
for your kid you haven't moved their
cycle to later and be more in line with
yours in fact you've just sleep deprived
them and made them miss a window and
made them cranky the next day and made
your life more miserable so go to bed
soon after your kids go to bed and wake
up with them that's the way to do it
right the child alarm clock another
reason to have children yes I got a dog
a puppy and then that became a dog
specifically well for many reasons but
one reason was I wanted to be one of
those early morning Raj you know 5 30
a.m every morning but I ended up getting
a bulldog that would literally sleep 16
hours if he could a nuclear bomb could
go off and he wouldn't wake up but what
I started to learn was that Bulldogs
actually have sleep apnea there it's a
as far as I know they're the only
species that has a genetically
um they're essentially an inbred um
sleep defect yeah and so I actually
don't encourage people to get Bulldogs
because it's kind of a cruel breed they
suffer a lot in that body that they're
born into anyway
um a dog can accomplish some some of
this but get that get the uh the breed
of dog that is going to wake up early so
in other words don't get a bulldog or a
Mastiff well you know interestingly all
all
um predatory animals like dogs and cats
us
um well more dogs cats and lions than us
Wills can sleep you know 16 hours a day
ferrets are predatory they fight a pet
ferret yeah and I sadly I also used to
work on ferrets publish a number of
papers delightful animals yeah and great
because you can study development it's
really cool um because they're born very
alterial like we are with brains that
are not very well developed and so you
can see what happens through development
and how important these different phases
of development really are but yes
um
yeah maybe we're not as Predator as much
Predators as we think because in fact we
our sleep is somewhere between the prey
and the Predators
um in terms of the amount of sleep that
we usually need a night but those
Predators can sleep 16 hours
um napping all day long and and they're
more crepuscular perhaps like their prey
arm so Dawn and dusk active yeah Don and
dusk active
um yeah but anyway yes uh children and
dogs actually in if there was a poll
done by the national sleep Foundation to
see what the number one thing is that
wakes people up at night and number two
is going to the bathroom number three is
children because
um you know you're when your children
are young but that only lasts a few
years that they'll wake you up when
they're babies
um but the number one thing is pets and
pets needing to go out
um or cats wanting to curl up with you
or whatever it is Pets needs will wake
you up more in the middle of the night
than anything else another reason to not
get a nocturnal pet people who get
hamsters pretty quickly realize that
they are nocturnal and they want to run
on their wheel around yeah you got to
put them in the living room away from
where you sleep I vote fish tank folks
um freshwater fish tank there are all
sorts of reasons to not get a saltwater
tank freshwater fish tank
or a child
um I appreciate that vote and I
appreciate you mentioning ferrets and by
the way folks they are carnivores they
are not rodents and they are they have
very elaborate brain structures and
they're very smart
um in the same family as the honey
badgers and the other musculates anyway
well I shouldn't uh geek out too much on
on the mustolids or else I'll take the
the remainder of all our time
I'd love for you to tell us about
REM sleep and the Sleep later in the
night as it relates to dreams and
emotionality and this is probably
um the appropriate time for you to
introduce us to this incredible
structure in the brain which is the
locus ceruleus a difficult
um structure to spell but a beautiful a
beautifully named structure
um
I find Lucas release to be just
fascinating and I know I you know a
small fraction of what it does and I'm
hoping you're going to educate me and
and our audience about more about what
it does and hopefully tell us a little
bit about its relationship to
epinephrine AKA adrenaline yeah I'm so
glad you brought this up because I can
totally geek out on the locus or list
please do Locus meaning spot or place
and serverless meaning blue so you could
just call it the blue spot that's the
easiest every animal with a brain has a
blue spot and
um yeah and I mean every other animal
with the brain because of course there
are animals with nervous systems that
are not centralized like jellyfish
um but anyway we're digressing there so
um the locus to release is filled with
neurons that have in them norepinephrine
which is the brain's version of
epinephrine or adrenaline is also called
noradrenaline and what it does is it
just like adrenaline and the rest of our
bodies it helps Primus to respond to our
environment so when Locus rulis neurons
Fire and Fire in a burst we can switch
our attention and they will fire in a
burst if for example a loud noise
happens in the middle of your
concentrating on something so you can it
helps it fires and it helps you switch
your attention to that thing and then
learn quickly from it so it's really
important in a stress response it helps
us do a quick one trial learning and and
then a tonic activity during the day
when you're just you know doing normal
going about your normal concentration
kind of activity activities is really
good for sustained attention it it works
with the cholinergic system of our basal
forebrain which is really important for
learning and memory also to help us
learn about things and put things
together
but just Tonica level levels are
signature of wakefulness and alertness
so too much is panic with a local
surrealist activity a burst is switching
attention and then tonic levels are
sustained constant attention and then
when we go to sleep the locus cerealis
slows and goes from about on average two
Hertz to about one Hertz one cycle per
second
tonically and then when we go into REM
sleep it's the only time when it shuts
off completely and
it appears that that complete silence is
really really important for a number of
things and the main thing that I think
it's important for is the ability to
erase and break down synapses that are
no longer working for us so they encode
things that are false now or they are
encoding things that we
learned in the novelty encoding Pathways
of our of our brain that have now been
Consolidated to other Pathways and so we
need to Now erase them from the novelty
encoding pathway and that is really
really important for being able to
continue to learn things all of our
lives so like erasing that REM
um or that I don't know what do you call
those discs that you stick into
computers that'll uh hard drive uh no um
erasing your thumb drive so that thumb
drive is what you carry around all day
long and then during sleep you write
that thumb drive to the cortex to the
long-term memory structures and you need
to refresh that thumb drive
and that's what happens during REM sleep
when the locus cerealis is off because
whenever it's on and neurodrenaline is
there it helps us to put things together
it helps us to learn and strengthen
synapses but it does not allow us to
actually weaken synapses that are also a
really important part for Life important
part of lifelong learning
um yeah there's so much more I could say
about that yeah Lucas Aurelia sounds
fascinating so it's connected to the
basal forebrain cholinergic system
um the neurons in Locust ceruleus if I'm
not mistaken release
norepinephrine perhaps epinephrine as
well uh um well no the brain's version
of epinephrine is norepinephrine um the
other thing it also uh the precursor to
norepinephrine is dopamine and so the
source of dopamine in the hippocampus
seems to be the locus cereals and it's
still a mystery is under what conditions
the Locust rules also releases dopamine
but it's really important when we're
learning something new to also release
dopamine or to at least activate the
dopaminergic receptors in our
hippocampus so yeah so dopamine
norepinephrine and then there's also
galanin which is important for releasing
when we're stressed and it helps also
without rapid learning it works in
concert with norepinephrine and in doing
what it needs to do to strengthen
synapses so that we learn really quickly
I I love
um that there are multiple molecules
involved because that signals us to a
principle which is that even if people
can't remember all the names
um that rarely in biology is something
handled by just one molecular pathway
that redundancy is the rule yeah because
signaling
attention to specific events is so
important so that I'm going to use that
as a just so story I always say you know
I wasn't consulted at the design phase
but it makes sense to me as to why
redundancy would exist in this system
absolutely and in fact when we form
hypotheses about the brain
we're always wrong and the reason why
we're always wrong is because it's more
complicated than we'd like to think and
because in our brains when we're forming
hypotheses it's we fail to account for
all of the factors that are involved you
know the glia the neuropeptides the
neurotransmitters the physical structure
of synapses and so when I was going
through grad school 35 years ago uh we
the Dogma was that every neuron contains
one neurotransmitter and releases one
neurotransmitter and you had excitatory
neurotransmitters and inhibitory
neurotransmitters and neuromodulatory
neurotransmitters but that's as
complicated as got and then we started
talking about neuropeptides and people
said oh no please don't don't complicate
it and then we start talking about how
neurons contain both neuropeptides and
neurotransmitters and maybe more than
one neurotransmitter maybe even hormones
too even hormones and oh Lord you know
it's just so complicated but gotta admit
that's why it works right and every time
the brain teaches us something new about
itself that we didn't hypothesize we say
oh of course is that wouldn't work if
the way I hypothesized it with it you
know we actually need redundancy we need
all these systems to work together
so it's uh daunting sometimes but it
also ensures many many careers in
science and Neuroscience in particular
so um note that aspiring scientists
there's plenty of room uh for Discovery
do you want me to talk about
norepinephrine yeah yes well what I'd
love what I'd love for you to um tell us
about is you know what role this lack of
norepinephrine released during rapid eye
movement sleep is thought to achieve and
maybe you could also review some of your
work describing conditions under which
norepinephrine invades yeah rapid eye
movements sleep and other patterns of
sleep and how that can be detrimental
yeah so a lot of this is hypothetical
but based on a lot of good evidence that
we're sewing together into the schema
from which these hypotheses come so a
model schema from which the hypotheses
come but one thing that happens to
people with post-traumatic stress
disorder is that there is a lot of
evidence that the locus cerealis doesn't
stop firing in REM sleep so whereas
their levels of norepinephrine might be
similar to people without PTSD during
the day and even during the first part
of the night during the wee hours of the
morning and when you measure
norepinephrine levels from metabolites
in the blood or the cerebral spinal
fluid you see that people with PTSD it's
during the wee hours of the morning when
you have the most REM sleep that they
have their neuropinephrine levels
differentiate most from those that don't
have PTSD and so that's evidence that
the locus reality is not shutting down
during REM sleep like it should other
evidence is heart rate variability when
our Locus realist is firing our heart
rates are generally a little higher and
they don't vary as much as they do when
the locusceralis is not firing so during
slow wave sleep normally have this big
juicy variability in heart rate with
every breath in and breath out because
our neurodenergie levels or
norepinephrine levels are lower during
REM sleep that goes away entirely and
our heart rate is is um
is
dominated by
parasympathetic rather than sympathetic
activity and also what our brain is
driving you know what we're dreaming
about for example if We're Dreaming
we're running our heart rates will go up
but norepinephrine levels still should
be low or off so people with PTSD that
neurodenergics we're studying these in
rats too is it true that our Locus cells
doesn't
um shut off when we have post-traumatic
stress disorder and the preliminary
evidence is yes it's true that it
doesn't shut off so what that would do
is
norepinephrine would act at synapses to
prevent that weakening that you really
need for example of novelty encoding
structures and it keeps memories in that
novelty encoding structure even once
it's Consolidated to the rest of the
brain so in the hippocampus which is
important for
remembering things throughout our lives
and and it's that thumb drive
um we
we need it to be erased so that we can
learn new things once it's been
Consolidated to the the hard drive of
our cortex and so if we're not able to
do that we fill up that Ram
um really quickly or that thumb drive
really quickly and we're not able to
learn new things so for example after a
trauma I talked about the locus
responding in stressful situations
that's great it's very adaptive but then
you need it to stop once you've learned
what you need to learn from it and you
want to go to sleep you need the locus
for Less to calm down and during REM
sleep you want it to stop because then
when you've Consolidated that traumatic
memory to the cortex you need to erase
it from the novelty encoding structures
for example in the hippocampus so that
then when you're in the context of
safety you can learn those new things
those new contexts and
um and stop responding to those same
stimuli as though you're in that
original situation so if you're not able
to erase that thumb drive you will
always feel like that trauma happened
that same day like earlier that same day
and respond as you would to a an early a
recent trauma which is with beating
heart and all of that
so even memories that are years past if
you're never able to downscale that
novelty encoding structure and you purge
it from that traumatic memory it will
stay fresh and new and then become
maladaptive
I'd like to just take a brief moment and
thank one of our podcast sponsors which
is inside tracker inside tracker is a
personalized nutrition platform that
analyzes data from your blood and DNA to
help you better understand your body and
help you reach your health goals I've
long been a believer in getting regular
blood work done for the simple reason
that blood work is the only way that you
can monitor the markers such as hormone
markers lipids metabolic factors Etc the
impact your immediate and long-term
Health one major challenge with blood
work however is that most of the time it
does not come back with any information
about what to do in order to move the
values for hormones metabolic factors
lipids Etc into the ranges that you want
with inside tracker changing those
values becomes very straightforward
because it has a personalized dashboard
that you can use to address the
nutrition-based behavior-based
supplement-based approaches that you can
use in order to move those values into
the ranges that are optimal for you Your
vitality and your longevity inside
tracker now includes a measurement of
APO lipoprotein B so-called APO B and
they're all plan apob is a key marker of
cardiovascular health and therefore
there's extreme value to knowing your
apob levels if you'd like to try inside
tracker you can go to insidetracker.com
huberman to get 20 off any of inside
tracker's plans again that's inside
tracker.com huberman to get 20 off
what approaches are you aware of that
can turn down the output of locus
ceruleus during these phases of sleep
and for that matter what things can
cause ramping up of locus cerules during
this phase of sleep
we've had a couple podcast episodes solo
episodes and with guests talking about
trauma we had Dr Paul Conte who's a
Stanford train Harvard train
um psychiatrist who talked a lot about
trauma wrote an excellent book on trauma
and
um certainly sleep was emphasized as a
key thing like get enough sleep but here
you're saying even if somebody with
trauma gets enough sleep if Locus
ceruleus is hyperactive during sleep
those traumas are going to persist and
most of the trauma treatments that I'm
aware of are everything ranging from
cognitive behavioral therapy talk
therapy drug therapy EMDR hypnosis
um nowadays there's a lot of interest
and attention on
um clinical studies on exploring
psychedelics high-dose psilocybin and
MDMA so it's a vast landscape none of
which as far as I know is really focused
on sleep specifically no they're not and
they should be because actually
psychedelics is a sleep-like state and
um it's a rem sleep-like State although
of course there are some major
differences so
yeah so much to talk about here so
antidepressants
um are often neurodenergic or
serotonergic reuptake Inhibitors so they
leave norepinephrine actually out there
in the synapses and what that does is it
inhibits REM sleep and if you're able to
get REM sleep it would probably be REM
sleep with some neurogenergic activity
so actually I think anyway I'm not a
physician that antidepressants are
counter-indicated you don't want to take
them if you've experienced a trauma and
you're experiencing PTSD because if
anything it's going to make it worse or
at least prevent the type of adaptive
REM sleep that you really need in order
to resolve those emotions and move on
um is that statement specific to
antidepressants that tickle the
noradrenergic pathway so the the one
that comes to mind is I can never
pronounce it brupa prion which is uh
what I think brand name is Wellbutrin
it's a dopaminergic and noradrenergic
Agonist but so that's the net effect as
opposed to the Prozac Zoloft variety
which are ssris yes yes but
ssris themselves also are problematic
because we didn't talk about it yet but
the dorsal rafae nucleus which produces
serotonin which the specifics serotonin
specific serotonin reuptake Inhibitors
block from being reuptaken
leaves too much serotonin out there and
what serotonin also is another
neurodenergic I'm sorry another
neurotransmitter that's down regulated
during REM sleep that's specifically off
during REM sleep and what serotonin does
is it weights all of our cognition to
being able to recognize novelty again so
it sort of Waits our brain away from a
sense of familiarity and toward novelty
and
um it might be one reason why it's an
effective
antidepressant because it makes the
world feel fresh and new again right but
you when you have
too much you're holding a novel
traumatic memory
um in your novelty encoding structure
too strongly already you don't want to
again weight things toward novelty you
need that absence of Serotonin also to
help you get that sense of familiarity
and to start erasing the novelty
encoding structures so you need both to
be absent it's really interesting we
hear a lot about serotonin and uh it's
not often discussed in terms of its
features related to novelty enough I
think and what you just described
accused me to something that Dr Paul
conti and others have said in terms of
trauma and here I'm paraphrasing so my
apologies to them for not getting this
exactly right that that an effective
treatment for trauma
does not erase the traumatic memory but
it causes a transition of what once was
disturbing and invasive
and maladaptive to
eventually just become kind of a boring
old story that has kind of a fuzzy
texture to it as opposed to this kind of
sharp
High friction texture that invades our
thinking
um and obviously our sleeping States as
well so um again and uh I appreciate the
disclaimer or the caveats around you
know not being a clinician Etc but I do
think that there's a lot of interest now
in whether or not antidepressants are
effective for trauma or not and I think
these these aspects of neuromodulation
as they relate to
um let's call it erasing traumas or
changing the emotional load of traumas
during sleep
um is something important to take note
we also have a lot of clinicians that
listen to this podcast so they should
also take note
um please so if I want to reduce the
amount of norepinephrine released from
Locus ceruleus during rapid eye movement
sleep to eliminate the troubling or
maybe even traumatic memories
and allow late stages of sleep each
night to have their maximum positive
effect is there anything that I can do
besides avoiding
um avoiding traumas avoiding
serotonergic or neuroadrenergic
compounds well I would also avoid
anything just prior to going to sleep
that might excite those systems so a lot
of novelty a lot of you know exciting
um stress inducing video games
try and enter sleep with as much calm as
you can so maybe deep breathing
exercises that's a beautiful way to calm
your sympathetic fight-or-flight system
is deep breathing and we haven't been
able to test this with rats because we
can't ask them to do a deep breathing
exercise
there might be a way we can do that but
I haven't found out or figured it out
yet but if there's a way you can make
your sympathetic system nervous system
calm down before you go to sleep might
free for you meditation or deep
breathing exercises might be for some a
warm bath or a comforting book nothing
too exciting but
um also nothing too boring perhaps
um just something right in the middle
which makes you feel happy and calm as
what you should do and if you instead go
to sleep while you're anxious or
um you're hyped up then your sleep could
become maladaptive another thing that
happens in rats that we have yet to know
if it happens in women is that female
rats have three phases of their Ester
cycle that their Locus realist doesn't
seem to calm down during REM sleep as
much and we don't know why but during
the high estrogen phases of their
estracycle the locus shuts down just
like it does in male rats but in the
other three phases it doesn't so
um one thing that might work and in fact
there are a few studies that show it it
could work really well is
um uh giving women after a trauma event
something that contains estrogen because
estrogen somehow is protective against
PTSD and they know that through
retrospective studies
where they gave women an emergency room
either a pill with estrogen and or
without and those that had pill with
estrogen in it were much less likely to
get PTSD from that trauma as measured a
year later than those that had the pill
without so
um there's some really good Studies by
Bronwyn Graham she's out of Australia to
really hone in on how much estrogen do
you need and also testosterone just so
you know it gets converted to estrogen
in the brain so testosterone also can be
protective because it gets converted to
estrogen but there's something about
estrogen that's really helpful and
protective about that from
from the high Locos cyrillus firing and
this is again preliminary data that we
don't have full we don't have all the
answers yet and
um we are looking into it actively right
now but it's really important the other
thing about women is that we are two to
four times more susceptible to
anxiety-related mental health disorders
including post-traumatic stress disorder
so if we could figure out what's
happening to the locus oralis during
sleep in women
um that and then figure out a way to
normalize that so the locus realist is
silent when it needs to be silent I
think we could go a long way in in
helping women be more resilient to
stress related disorders
what are some other
um sex differences as they relate to
sleep yeah yeah that's a really good
question there have been very few
studies unfortunately uh of women in
sleep
um women and estracycle or menstrual
cycle and sleep and
um but what we have found which actually
largely replicated a study in 1960
um is that that women or females rather
at high estrogen High hormonal phases of
their estracycle or menstrual cycle
sleep a lot less but that sleep is more
efficient so that sleep is more dense in
those sleep spindles which I haven't
gone into what they might do except this
connection between the hippocampus and
cortex but it's those sleep spindles are
more dense and more coherent across the
brain areas the Theta cycle which is 5
to 10 Hertz in the hippocampus important
for one year learning and also important
during REM sleep is also bigger and
juicier during the high hormonal phases
so even though there's less sleep it's
more efficient and better
um
but uh so so all of that efficiency
seems to be reduced in those other
hormonal phases
um so even though you might sleep a
little more
um you might need more sleep in fact in
order to accomplish the same thing that
you can get with that short
um
very efficient sleep of high hormonal
phases very interesting I think um
there is a growing Trend at least among
nih-funded grants to require
that as they refer to it in the grants a
biological sex as a variable yeah and
then here we're talking about sex the um
the verb although I'm sure there's
studies about that too but biological
sex is a variable because there is a
dearth of studies exploring sex
differences in in most everything
there's all sorts of reasons for that
but more importantly that fortunately
the trend is Shifting yeah
um and even when you study males versus
females a lot of people just say include
females in their studies but then don't
track the estracycle or menstrual cycle
and hormones have huge effects on our
Behavior I mean just think of it when
he's had sex you know before our
hormones come in we're not interested in
it and suddenly you know that's kind of
a main driver of behaviors hormones can
definitely change who we are and what we
do so we should be studying hormones not
just sex I always say that puberty is
perhaps the most massive transformation
and rate of Aging that any of us go
through in a short amount of time an
individual their cognition changes their
worldview changes and that's largely
hormonal driven and obviously neural
architecture has changed too
um I'm very happy that you mentioned I'm
trying to get into Commerce States prior
to sleep and some ways to do that I'm a
big fan and I've talked a lot before on
this podcast about things like Yoga
Nidra which is a non-movement based
practice sometimes called non-sleep
depressed where people actually take
some time each day to practice how to go
into a more parasympathetic AKA relaxed
State deliberately because it's a bit of
a skill yeah yeah it's um and there's
there's some good data really mostly out
of a laboratory in Scandinavia showing
huge increases in um Nigro striatal
dopamine when people go basically engage
in a practice of deliberate
um non-movement and that the brain
actually enters states of a very shallow
sleep so sort of nap-ish but the idea is
to actually stay awake but motionless
and it does seem to restore a certain
number of features of neurochemistry but
perhaps more importantly it teaches
people to to relax which is something
that most people are not very good at
um but in any event
um and people who listen to this podcast
have heard me say this over and over
again so I sound like a broken record
but this practice as a zero cost
practice that doesn't require any
pharmacology does seem to really enhance
people's ability to fall asleep more
quickly and to fall back asleep if they
wake up in the middle of the night so in
any event another plug for nsdr Yoga
Nidra well I just also want to add to
that that's one of the reasons why
insomnia is so Insidious is because when
people feel like they haven't gotten
enough sleep and aren't getting enough
sleep and become anxious about getting
enough sleep and then you're anxious
before going to sleep like I'm not going
to fall asleep it's going to be 45
minutes in and then that's a positive
feedback loop so you need to bring break
that Loop say okay my body's going to
get as much sleep as it needs I needn't
worry about it and then practice this
relaxation to say hey it's all okay it's
going to be all right and and then
concentrate on things that relax you
um whether it's concentrating or not
concentrating whatever it is
you mentioned
um Yoga Nidra and that reminded me of
Transcendental Meditation which is
something that also hasn't been studied
well or largely because we can't ask
non-human animals to do it and so we
don't know what's happening with our
neurochemistry and our brain activity
in a deep and meaningful way but one
thing that has has been shown in those
that can do it really well is that that
Theta activity that I said happens when
you're learning something or when you're
in REM sleep it it's well established
and and
increases during the Transcendental
Meditation so it might be that some
states of meditation could in some ways
re replace or mimic some functions of
for example REM sleep but again we don't
know if all the neurochemistry is right
to do for example the thing that I was
talking about which is erasing the
novelty encoding structures the brain
that needs an absence of norepinephrine
and serotonin which we don't know if
that goes away with with Transcendental
Meditation we just don't know the answer
to that yet yeah the studies on on Yoga
Nidra and sleep replacement are kind of
interesting
um it does seem to be the case that
nothing can really replace sleep except
sleep but that if one is sleep deprived
or is having trouble falling back asleep
that these
um things like
and I hear it's I acknowledge this is
essentially like Yoga Nidra but we now
call it non-sleep deep breast or nsdr
because oftentimes for names like Yoga
Nidra act as a kind of a barrier for uh
what would otherwise be um people
willing to try a practice it sounds
mystical it sounds like flying carpets
and you know it sounds like you have to
go to esslin by the way esselyn's a
beautiful place but it sounds like you
have to go there or live in the west
coast to believe in this stuff but it's
simply not the case these are practices
that that are really just
um self-directed relaxation as a
practice that that allows people to get
better and better at directing their
brain States towards more relaxation and
most people have an asymmetry like for
instance most people can force
themselves to stay up later
but they have a hard time going to sleep
earlier and that just speaks to the
asymmetry that's probably adaptive in
survival based that we can ramp
ourselves up far more easily than we can
tend to calm ourselves down yeah and
actually you know to appeal to other
Christians like me prayer can be a
wonderful way to calm yourself down
because through prayer you're giving
your cares to God and saying you know
and then you are
relaxed more relaxed and I just want to
say that because the same reason that
yoga might put some people off it might
put some people off
um to to talk about prayer but it's the
same
process of being able to relax and yeah
and get outside our own experience a
little bit experience yeah
um back out get a world view that might
actually also help us to relax
um well you might be surprised at how
many um clinicians and scientists who've
come on this podcast have mentioned
things like prayer from various
perspectives Christianity Judaism Muslim
traditions and others that um as a as a
parallel to all of these things and I
think what it speaks to is the fact that
ultimately the biological architectures
that we're all contending with are going
to be identical right and so different
ways to tap into them and ones that are
um congruent with people's beliefs I
think is are great yeah
um yeah because anything non-congruent
with your beliefs is also stressful
right and feels forced and that's why
you know this idea of calling it
non-sleep deep rest in addition to Yoga
Nidra was not to detract from the naming
or the history around Yoga Nidra but I
was finding that it was a barrier you
know likewise um you're gonna need your
attempts to include things like
intentions whereas nsdr scripts and by
the way we will provide links to some
nscr and Yoga Nidra scripts but nsdr has
no intentions it's simply a body scan
deep relaxation based so it's sort of
the scientific version of all of this
stuff and actually we study it in the
laboratory and and some of the brain
states that people go into but that's a
discussion for another time this is hard
my mother used to tell me when I said
well we could play I can't go to sleep
she'd say well
you know start with your toes and relax
so you would clench your muscles around
your toes and relax them and do that all
the way from your toes all the way to
your head and I don't know where she got
this it might have been her own common
sense or she might have gotten it from
this uh NP NPR show it's called the mind
can keep you well she at least to listen
to but that's another intentional
relaxation that focuses on the body
um rather than on your own mental
processes but I do a little bit of work
with the military and um there's a
method within certain communities of
Special Operations in the US military
where if they can't sleep or they're
having challenges sleeping they will
deliberately try and relax their facial
muscles in particular like sort of drape
the facial muscles and use long or
exhale emphasized breathing does seem to
increase the probability of
transitioning back into sleep and those
are Hallmarks of Yoga Nidra non-sleep
deep rest body scans and and so I think
all of these things Converge on on a
common theme you know as a
neurobiologist we can say all of the
things that we are describing certainly
move the needle away from Locus ceruleus
activation and we haven't done the
experiment to really look at that but it
seems all these things are counter to
noradrenaline release another one is
yawning
self is with that kind of
sort of tensing of all the muscles in
your face and then relaxing them so it
might be why we on we don't know why we
yawn yet but
um it might also have it would be really
great actually animals yawn too you know
my Bulldog was a was a Perpetual if he
wasn't sleeping he was yawning
and it would be interesting to see what
yawning does to the Lucas realist does
that also come and switch local circles
activity because it's an interesting
that facial nerve like trigeminal nerve
you know the through the vagus connects
um indirectly to the locus aurelis and
has a powerful effect on that
interesting uh common I think friend of
ours and direct colleague viewers uh
Jack Feldman was a guest on this podcast
telling us about all the amazing
structures he and others have discovered
in the in respiration and breathing yeah
sounds like we have a collaboration
Brewing here the three of us should
should definitely carry out
I'd love for you to share with us a
little bit more about these spindles
that have come up a few times and I
don't know if it's relevant to this so
if it's not let's separate it out but
I'd love for you to tell us a little bit
about the role of sleep in problem
solving and creativity and if spindles
are involved and I'll consider myself
lucky for batching them in the same
question and if they're not involved
simply feel free to separate them out I
think they could be involved and the
reason why I think that could be
involved because we now know a lot more
about spindles first of all the first
thing that we knew first of all we
ignored them then we thought they had
something to do with keeping us asleep
and that was their function is when an
external stimulus came they would keep
us asleep because they would arise but
now we know that the density of our
sleep spindles the number that we
produce per minute is well correlated
with our intelligence in the first place
and that no matter what your
intelligence is and no matter what your
sleep spindle density is if you learn
something during the day and increase
your sleep spindle density it's really
almost perfectly correlated with our
ability to consolidate that information
and incorporate it into the schema that
we already have in our brain so if you
try and learn something new even if your
sleep spindle density at Baseline is
great if you don't increase your sleep
spindles that night you're not gonna you
know use sleep to really incorporate it
interestingly sleep spindles are poor in
those with schizophrenia it's one of the
characteristic signatures of sleep is
that sleep spindles are very few and far
between which might mean that
um that people with schizophrenia might
not be able to incorporate new
information into already existing schema
and instead it sort of Flaps in the
breeze out there and can be accessed
erroneously at times when you you know
you don't want it to be involved so um I
digress so sleep spindles and creativity
so one of the things we now know through
some great Studies by Julie seat and
Anita luthy is that sleep spindles are
accompanied by an incredible
plasticity out in the distal dendrites
the listening branches of our neurons
that listen to other cortical areas so
there are proximal dendrites in our
neurons that listen to the external
world and are conducted through the
thalamus and then there are distal
dendrites which listen to an internal
kind of you know conversation that's
having happening in our brains it's kind
of you know our internal State really
and during sleep spindles that's when
those distal dendrites are able to best
learn from other cortical areas and from
the hippocampus it is during sleep
spindles of the hippocampus and the
cortex are best connected and when that
class incredible plasticity can happen
when I talk about schema that's a
cortical cortical thing that's when you
know the image of Santa Claus and
presence you know comes together it's
not through some external thing once we
learn those things together it's our
cortex that that encodes that and brings
those images back up together and that
during sleep spindles when that's
happening when that there's big surges
of calcium into those distal dendrites
and where plasticity happens in in just
huge amounts during that sleep spindle
stage of sleep which is N2 stage there's
also some another excitatory event that
comes all the way from the brain stem
and projects everywhere in our cortex
which is called pgo waves that's P for
pons G for ingeniculate nucleus of the
thalamus which is where they're first
discovered an O for occipital area which
is our visual area which is again where
they're first discovered but in fact
it's now been shown that pgo waves which
we should generalize to p waves because
they come from the ponds and go to the
thalamus and then the cortex happens all
over the brains and that is where
glutamate which is a major excitatory
neurotransmitter involved in learning
and plasticity is being released in big
amounts also in those distal dendrites
so p waves and spindles work together to
cause plasticity and so our schema
together which could be the origins for
insight and creativity now when pgo
waves or p waves or first discovered it
was thought to be random because this
small area that generates p waves all
over the brain you know projects all the
all over the thalamus and causes p waves
all over and you don't measure p waves
all over the brain at the same time in
fact it's just seems sporadic and random
so that's probably and p waves are also
happening even more during REM sleep
rapid eye movement sleep so that's
probably that's why people think that
REM dreams are so Random is because
these p waves are random and they could
generate dreams because they're an
internal
source of excitation that kind of
replaces the outside world during our
dream state and so these p waves if they
are random could could function could be
the underlying reason why REM sleep
dreams are random and it might also be
why creativity can happen there is
because we're randomly activating
co-activating different things in our
brain that we can then sew together but
it might not be as random as we think so
that's a caveat there I just learned a
lot from you because I I teach brain
stem to medical students and I talk
about the pawns and the pawns like this
dense collection of all these different
nuclei involved in a bunch of different
things and it's close by a bunch of
interesting things and it's still kind
of a mysterious brain area but when I
learned about pgo waves I thought pawns
geniculate occipital because occipital
is most commonly associated with visual
cortex I thought it was the origin of
the visual component of dreams it
probably is I'm very happy to learn that
they should be called p waves because
they include lots of different areas of
the brain and it makes really good sense
to me why the kind of pseudo-randomness
of Dreams especially these late night
and early morning
um later in sleep I should say and early
morning dreams seem to be cobbled
together from kind of disparate
experiences I mean you walk through a
door and suddenly it's a completely
different context and Landscape yes um
beautiful yeah I I like this idea a lot
it makes intuitive sense it makes
biological sense it also gives me
something to talk about to the medical
students next quarter when I talk about
pawns and you want to talk about where
in the ponds it's right below the locus
surlist it's called the sub surrealists
they're glutamatergic it's also called
sld sublateral dorsal nucleus so I love
it so
um note to any aspiring neurobiologist
there's a a vast landscape of yet to be
undiscovered structure and functions in
the pond do you want to work on
something that is sure to reveal
something novel work on the palms
because it's in every textbook it's a
clinically very important structure
um sadly gliomas can and another cancers
of the brain can sometimes can often
surface in the in the ponds but but we
still know very little about it
um
I read a paper this last year or and I
think it was covered in a bit of popular
press that during rapid eye movement
sleep
people can solve problems or respond to
external stimuli like for instance they
would give them math problems they'd
whisper in their ear while they were in
REM sleep you know what's two plus two
and people would say even though they
were paralyzed apparently they could
still move their mouth because they'd
say four or something like that or
they'd say you know what's your name and
people could respond and so that in REM
sleep perhaps people
um some elements of cognition are still
active I'm glad you brought that out
what do you think and I don't know the
authors of that study and um and uh
listen If Ever I say something wrong
it's great on this podcast because
someone will tell us in the YouTube
comments it's one of the great uses of
YouTube comments but I'd love to know
your thoughts on that study I mean is
that just kind of a a
an odd feature that or does this have
meaning should we actually care about
this result there's no just about it
it's really actually intriguing and
interesting and might relate to this
paper that I talked about where we where
we said different areas of the brain can
be in different states at the same same
time so lucid dreaming is another thing
we can't ask animals to do or can't ask
them if they've done it but um we can
certainly ask humans to do it and some
people can do it really well and it
would be really interesting to see in
those people who could lucid dream
really well whether they spend more or
less time in this asymmetrical state
where one area of the brain is in one
state and another area the brain is in
another and it might be that those
people can respond to questions during
REM sleep best are those that have the
most asymmetry or or dissimilarity or
dissociation between subcortical and
cortical structures or it might be that
they're the ones with the most symmetry
we don't know
um I do worry a little bit about lucid
dreamy because people are it's a fad
people are really excited about it and
to be able to remember one's dreams is
fun often unless they're nightmares and
but it's really interesting or to be
able to direct one's dreams if they are
a nightmare is these really wonderful
power to have and to be able to redirect
a nightmare that has been repeated to
something else and then kick yourself
out of that repetitive nightmare is
really nice but
um I worry a little bit about because we
know so little about what's actually
going on in the brain and if this lucid
dreaming state is preventing us from for
example from the locus realist from
calming down or the serotonergic system
from silencing like it should and maybe
what we're doing during this state is
yeah we're activating the learning and
memory structures but in a way that's
maladaptive in terms of the Erasure that
we need to do so maybe one of the
reasons why most people don't remember
most of their dreams is for good reason
your hippocampus is in a state where
it's not writing new memories in fact
writing out it's the memories it learned
during the day to the cortex and it's
immune from incoming new information so
um so maybe lucid dreaming is bad
because you're you're activating the
hippocampus in a way that's writing new
memories and it might be really
maladaptive for things like you know
PTSD on the other hand let me just argue
myself right out of this when I used to
have a repeated nightmare when I was a
kid my mother was so wise would tell me
well listen just next time you're in
that dream
you know say hey I'm in a dream and then
change something about it so she and I
rehearsed what the horrible dream that
it was it was a big monster you know
running after me and my legs were like
mud and I couldn't run away and it was
just terrifying and that was a dream I
would have you know time and time again
she said okay next time what are you
gonna do in that monster comes after you
laugh so I'm gonna run away no you
that's what you do every time and it's
always the same outcome you can't run so
let's do something different like what
what could you do that's different so I
came up with I'll I could turn around
and punch it in the nose yeah that's
great and so the next time I had that
dream I did recognize this is that same
old dream which means that there's part
of my brain that's conscious enough to
know that this that I'm in a dreaming
State and then I didn't have the courage
in my dream because I was still
terrified to punch you know or touch the
monster in any way but I did have the
courage to turn around and look at in
the eye and say no that was enough I
said no and that was enough to knock me
out of that Rhett of that dream so that
I never had it again I never had that
same dream again and in fact it gave me
peace about dreaming because I knew that
if ever there was a nightmare that was
just too scary I could probably do
something to change it and knock myself
out of it so even though I don't
recommend lucid dreaming on a normal
day-to-day basis if it's enough that can
knock you out of a rut
one thing that happens with people with
PTSD is they have the same repeated
horrible nightmare which is often a
reliving of the day's trauma that that
they had so maybe lucid dreaming can be
used on occasion to be a powerful tool
because there's so much plasticity that
happens during REM sleep to knock you
out of that ret of reliving that event
and and just change it you know and you
could probably practice that during
wakefulness
um rehearse the event that happened that
was so traumatic and then just introduce
a new element like you know
now I'm safe now you know the sound that
was associated with that really
traumatic thing I should now associate
with something else and next time I have
that dream I'm going to change it so
that sound is now this new thing that it
should be associated with safety and
that might be enough maybe I hope
um to knock you out of that repeated
Nightmare and maybe even start you on
the path to recovery because if you can
calm down about those nightmare stads of
sleep then maybe your Loca cyrillus
which is involved in stress can also
relax and you can do the Erasure parts
that need to be done
I love it I seem to recall a paper and
I'll have to find the reference and and
um send it to you we will also put in
the show note captions that described a
protocol that essentially matches this
um uh idea and well I think what they
had people do is either cue themselves
to a particular smell or tone in
wakefulness then to try and recall a
recurring nightmare yeah then during the
night's sleep they have the tone playing
in the background which would then cue
them to the wakeful state they're still
asleep mind you but in the pseudo Lucid
or Lucid State and then try and change
some variable as you're describing some
either look the the
um predator in the eyes or do something
different yeah and then in the waking
State take a little bit of time to try
and script out a different
um narrative altogether and it took
several nights as I recall or more but
that they were able to escape this
recurring nightmare it was like a week
or something yeah so you're familiar
with this guy it's a beautiful study I
loved it yeah we will put a reference to
that I um need to revisit that site
what's pretty recent but I need to dive
into it again because I think I I didn't
go as deep into it as I I should have no
no but the one thing that you
you said many right things but one of
the things you said is that they were
able to cue the dreamer
um when they knew when they were going
to REM sleep and then they played the
sound or had the odor now when you're
normally asleep alone in your bed you're
not going to be able to cue yourself but
it might be that rehearsal enough before
you go to sleep is enough to you know
help cue you to that repeated nightmare
remembering what the nightmare is and
then figuring out how to cue yourself to
do something different
for years I had the same recurring
nightmare over and over and over again
and it was so Salient and so clear and
I'm not going to share what it is
because it's um it's not that it's that
disturbing it was just I think it was
the emotional load of it and just how
Salient certain features were like one
person in um who's a real life person
had a particular
um clothing yeah on and it's like and
that just served as this cue and yeah I
don't know if I ever did any direct work
to try and deal with it but now it
almost seems silly to describe it oh
yeah well dreams are usually silly to
describe it was a pretty violent Dreams
yeah and your emotional system is so
geared up during REM sleep which is
another thing we could talk about yeah
please
um I would love to yeah so Locus
Aurelius has ideally suppressed so we
can't release norepinephrine we can't
act out our dreams
um this uh during these very emotionally
Laden
um thoughts and and storylines during
sleep this almost like starts to sound
like a little bit of a built-in
um while sleeping trauma therapy because
most trauma therapies involve trying to
get people into states of
um
counter to what most people think you
actually want to get close to the trauma
in terms of the narrative but try and
suppress the emotional activity of it or
and I guess that's the motivation for
ketamine-based therapies for trauma or
I've also heard and this is still
perplexing to me that other waking based
trauma therapies involve taking people
the other way making it very cathartic
take them to the peak of the emotional
response but then allow that to finally
cycle down into a more relaxed response
so please
um if there's anything about Locust
ceruleus and and dreams and that can
help people basically extinguish traumas
or traumatic features to to real life
events and we definitely want to know
about that yeah yeah well I think one of
the
things that people thought might help
after a trauma like a school shooting or
whatever you know car accident is to
talk about it and in but in fact that
ended up being counterproductive and I
think one of the reasons why it was
counterprotective is because it didn't
take them back down
um it brought them up and continued to
reactivate the emotions of it but then
didn't you know emphasize the safety
effect that it's over
um or help them work through how they
might avoid it again in the future to
calm the sympathetic nervous system down
again before they went to sleep and and
none of these studies has sleep ever
been considered but to me that's the key
part is bringing down your sympathetic
nerve system before you go to sleep so
that your sleep can be adaptive your
Locus realist can shut off like it
normally does or should do and then able
to erase the novelty of it the other
thing that
um I just mentioned a minute ago was
that the emotion system is highly
activated in REM sleep and that's
definitely true and that might seem
counterproductive in terms of you know
the nightmares and and how to help REM
sleep
be a therapeutic thing rather than a um
than a
in reinforcing the emotionality of the
trauma and I think the key to that again
is the absence of norepinephrine so even
though
the emotional system is in high gear
without norepinephrine you can actually
divorce those highly activated emotions
from the cognitive
parts of the memory that you have just
written out in that NT stage of sleep
when the sleep spindles are going so
um so you've just now Consolidated the
information that you'll need to survive
and to you know to make that adaptive
and now you need to divorce from that
schema and from that semantic parts of
memory the emotional part because
whenever you remember something
is fine if you remember them being
emotional at the time but you don't want
to bring back and so into that memory
all of the same emotional systems you
don't want to bring back you know the
heart rate changes and the sweating and
and all of that you want to be able to
remember all the parts of it and even
remember that you were traumatized and
that you did cry and that you did have
you know your heart was racing but when
you're talking about it years later you
don't want to have to relive all that
otherwise who who would ever want to
recall a dramatic memory because you're
basically putting yourself through the
same trauma which is what people with
PTSD have they don't want to recall this
traumatic memory because it's reliving
it like it's just happening again so
that's what we're thinking is that
um the emotional parts are no longer are
not able to be divorced because the
norepinephrine system is not downscaled
during REM sleep and so that REM sleep
serves to instead reinforce and in fact
amplify the emotions because your your
emotional system is up look surilis says
Hi
re-sewing in every night the
emotionality of those memories and with
the memory itself
um
told us a lot about Locus Aurelius and
norepinephrine from Locus cerules is
there any role for
um
norepinephrine epinephrine and cortisol
released from the adrenals my
understanding is that norepinephrine and
epinephrine will not cross the
blood-brain barrier which is probably
why we have a brain-based neurogenergic
system yeah Locus ceruleus and other and
other neurons actually that's a question
I should ask you are there other sites
in the brain where norepinephrine is
released from or is it just Locus
cerules um so there are
but it just occurred to me that um in
some cases like with raphae there are
other sources of serotonergic Drive in
the brain but raphae is like the means
yeah that's the one that goes to the
cortex and and and the locus roles is
also the one that goes to the cortex but
there are other adrenergic sources some
that from the brain stem that descend
and help us to ignore pain for example
um when we're stressed and needing to
run away from the tiger right we don't
want to be thinking oh my ankle hurts
you know you want to just be able to
ignore it and go do what you need to do
so
um yeah so there are lots of other
neurogenergic nuclei but the local
sterility is the main one that projects
all over the brain the actually the only
place that doesn't project is the dorsal
striatum you talked about ventral
striatum and addiction the dorsal
stratum is the only place the locus Rose
doesn't project to and that's involved
in and procedural learning motor
learning the kinds of learning that take
over when you're hippocampus for example
is compromised bilateral if you don't
have good hippocampus you can still do
procedural learning and do and it's
great it's a redundant system and so
um if your Locus cerealis is not working
if you don't have it anymore you can
still do if you if you don't have a good
hippocampus you can still do learning
through this dorsal stratum structure so
it might be for those kinds of learning
functions
sleep deprivation where you never let
the locus really stop firing is okay
because it doesn't have any receptors
for norepinephrine anyway so yeah and
what about bodily um like adrenals yeah
um you know I I often remind people
there's no such thing as adrenal burnout
per se that adrenals don't actually burn
out
um but some people have adrenal
insufficiency syndrome other people have
adrenals that are just chronically
cranking out epinephrine norepinephrine
and cortisol at the wrong times in
particular yeah yeah so
that those are great questions and I
think the answers to them have yet to be
discovered the connections between our
periphery and our central nervous system
but we know that there are beautiful
connections and it's untapped source of
being able to manipulate our brains is
to work through our bodies and so our
adrenals do great things they constrict
our blood vessels causing higher blood
pressure which help blood rush out to
all the extremities that need blood
um you know our muscles for example for
running away from the lion
um or the Tiger or meeting a grant
deadline or catching a train or catching
a train yeah the adrenals help our
hearts bump faster our muscles get
profused with the blood it needs it
diverts blood and everything away from
our
parasympathetic system which is rest and
digest we don't really need to digest
that croissant when we're running for a
train we can do that later
um so it's doing really important things
what we don't know because it doesn't
cross the blood-brain barrier is how
that affects the brain and whether our
if we can independently activate our
adrenals
um when a time when our brain thinks
that we should be fine and calm and
asleep how our brain detects that and is
it a feedback through our heart is
racing and then our brainstem says
what's going on my heart is racing and
then wakes us up and then our hearts are
racing together with our brain racing we
just don't know the answers to these
questions yet there are some good good
studies old studies but we need a lot
more I will another another nod to the
fact that there's lots of great work
ongoing and still to do
I'd love for you to tell us about some
of the work that you're doing more
recently on the relationship between
sleep and opiate use
withdrawal relapse and um and craving
just addiction generally uh I get a lot
of questions about people trying to come
off benzodiazepines or people's
challenges with benzodiazepine and other
types of addiction
um yeah what what is the role of sleep
in addiction and recovery from addiction
and opiates in particular yeah this is a
very young area and in fact my
laboratory has just started I have a
graduate student who's been in my lab
for just one year she's done amazing
work already but completely
groundbreaking work and what she has
discovered already we don't have the
paper out yet but we're working on it is
that
when animals withdraw from opiates and
this has been sort of replicated in
other ways with other types of things
our sleep is Disturbed our sleep is
terribly Disturbed and the amount of
sleep disturbance predicts relapse
behaviors and you might think well
course you're going to relapse if you
can't sleep because opiates calm you
down well one of the reasons why opiates
calm you down is because the locus
cerealis again loose fat is covered with
opiate receptors and that are normally
really responsive to our endogenous
opiates
um and so what what happens when we're
pleased for example or laughing or
whatever and Dodges opiates
um activate those receptors in the locus
rules and calm it down it actually
suppresses Locus activity makes us happy
and relaxed one of the things reasons
why opiates are so addictive is because
it also calms us down and makes us
relaxed but the problem with exogenous
opiates is that they really strongly
bind these receptors on our Locus
cerillas and if you take an exogenous
opiates again and again like you're
recovering from surgery for example take
these pain medications is that our Locus
really struggles to do what it's
supposed to do which is keep us awake
and learning and concentrating on things
so it will down regulate it will
internalize these receptors that are
normally only occupied by endogenous
opiates and and it will do this it will
change our genes that are associated
with producing these receptors so you
actually have very many fewer receptors
so the locus rules at least during
wakefulness can fire and help us to do
these things like learn about our
environment and so if you long term
reduce the number of receptors out there
then when you withdraw the exogenous
opiates it's not enough of your
endogenous opiates to to be able to
reoccupy those few receptors that are
there and our local spirulis has nothing
to calm it down anymore no pacifier and
it just fires and fires and fires and
that
phasic and tonic High activity stresses
us out because it's normally associated
with stress and so any exogenous
stressor that adds to that and also
activates her Locus roles there's
nothing to calm it down again and so it
just keeps firing it disturbs our sleep
and that's why maybe sleep disturbance
is a an indicator of a hyperactive Locus
cerillas and
um and such a good predictor of relapsed
behaviors because nobody likes to live
in that high stress state and they'll do
anything to get back to normal so the
problem with with
um taking these drugs is that it leaves
you excited and or sorry excited relaxed
and happy but then when you come off of
it you're worse than whether anywhere at
Baseline you take it again
um it only brings you up this far
because you have fewer receptors when
you come off it you're down even more
depressed and and anxious and are
depressed as a word I use Loosely and
that's not that's not what I certainly
central nervous system depression I mean
sleepier less motivated lower mood yeah
I mean our local surrealis is actually
it's a it's in the anxiety kind of
depression actually the anxiety related
depression so
um yeah so we don't know yet what and
there's some good research going on
right now what could restore our own
endogenous receptors so that our own
doogenous opiates can properly calm or
Locus
once that they have been tamped down by
exogenous opiates but that would be
really one way that you can access the
sleep disturbance so we talked about
sleep and the importance of sleep in
terms of learning and memory the
importance of the structure of the
90-minute cycle for all of that so you
can imagine if your sleep is disturbed
by too much Locos activity then the the
structure and the function of those
sleep spindles and that Theta during REM
sleep and the and the lack of
norepinephrine all of those structures
all those functions for
for learning something new like a new
behavior that doesn't involve the drugs
becomes compromised and so that's
something that Tanya lugos in
collaboration with Pamela Kennedy at
UCLA that we're looking at how is
learning and memory affected by the
sleep disturbance is there a way we can
um in animals that are coming off of
opiates can we restore their sleeps to
normal so that then they are less likely
to do relapse kinds of behaviors
fascinating and I'm I will certainly
have to have you back on to tell us the
results of those studies meanwhile I
think for anyone who's trying to come
off opiates exogenous opiates and
restore these systems
um what I'm hearing is that it's going
to take some time but that any and all
things that people can do to buffer
their healthy normal sleep architecture
like morning and daytime sunlight
limiting bright light exposure lowering
the temperature at night a number of
things that we've talked about on this
podcast deep breathing exercises
meditation whatever it is that helps you
calm yourself before sleep yeah right
would this would facilitate not just
sleep but perhaps even accelerate the
the recovery and um and shorten this
period of withdrawal which from the
questions I get and from what I hear
um can be absolutely brutal yeah um so I
can imagine I had to take opiates for I
only took it for three days after giving
birth to my
um first son I think Second Son one of
them and
um and just I just said after three days
this is enough I'm just going to try
Tylenol and so I I leaned myself not
weaned I just did a sudden sharp cut off
and even though I felt I didn't get the
high of opiates when I was taking the
um Tylenol codeine
um when I went off it boy it was like
PMS times 100 I was so anxious and upset
at little things it thankfully only
lasted a few hours but if I had taken it
for a week or two weeks who knows if
that my endogenous opiate receptors
would have been permanently down
regulated and I would have been an
addict you know an addict I would have
been addicted I shouldn't say an addict
there's negative connotations it's just
a very physiological state so no
judgments at all associated with it so
um yeah they're powerful powerful
painkillers but can also alter your
entire brain and rewire it yeah well um
all the more reason why I and many
others are grateful that you're doing
this work to figure out ways that people
can recover
um more quickly and more thoroughly
I must say you've taught us a tremendous
amount in um in a relatively short
amount of time about the architecture of
sleep the different phases the
relationship between sleep and dreaming
and this incredible structure Locus
cerules and I'm so happy we also got
into the ponds that just Delights me
because uh we rarely talk about the
pawns on this podcast but such an
interesting structure sex differences
that are important in creativity and
problem solving and um and Trauma sleep
spindles just such a wealth of
information and much of it that's
actionable for people so first of all I
want to say thank you for taking the
time to sit down and have this
conversation that so many people are
sure to benefit from I also want to
thank you for doing the work you do even
though I'm a fellow neurobiologist I
think that um it's not often that um we
take a step back and realize that it's
really the work of
um hard
thinking hard
um strongly motivated pis it stands for
principal investigator by the way pis
like yourself graduate students and
postdocs that really drive the discovery
forward and that lead to these new
Therapeutics Physicians are wonderful
clinicians are absolutely wonderful but
clinicians don't develop new treatments
they only implement the ones that
researchers discover so thank you for
being a brain Explorer with um with a
focus on um growing the good in the
world
um I know I speak for everybody when I
say thank you so much thank you so much
Andrew thank you for being an amazing
interviewer you brought a lot out of me
in a coherent form fashion that normally
I can't do when I'm speaking in public I
don't know about that I've heard your
lectures and their superb we'll direct
people to some of the other ones well
thank you and I also want to put a plug
in for graduate students in general and
then a key and amazing role that they
play in research
um I I'm a pi as you said I used to be a
graduate student and a postdoc trainee
myself doing all of this on the ground
Hands-On experimentation it's so hard to
do it's so hard to do right it's so hard
to think through all of that now I'm a
pi I get to be an idea person and just
say hey why don't you do this and hey
you know what do you think about that
and they of course
intellectually contribute so much to
these these planned experiments but they
also do the really hard work and so I
just want to say thank you graduate
students thank you to my graduate
students and all graduate students out
there thank you underpaid and and listen
and to the major institutions Stanford
UCLA and all other major institutions
pay them more please yes we need them
and they need to have a standard of
living not I'm not afraid to say that
despite my primary employer pay them
more they need it they deserve it they
deserve it absolutely great well we will
absolutely have you back again if you if
you'll be willing and meanwhile we will
direct people to where they can learn
more about you and your exciting work
and once again thanks so much thank you
so much thank you for joining me today
for my discussion about sleep mental
health physical health and performance
with Dr Gina Poe I hope you found it to
be as informative and as actionable as I
did in fact I'm already implementing the
regularity of bedtime plus or minus half
an hour in order to get that growth
hormone release and I can already see
both my sleep scores improving and my
feelings of daytime Vigor and focus and
other markers of sleep Health improving
as well if you're learning from and or
enjoying this podcast please subscribe
to our YouTube channel that's a terrific
zero cost way to support us in addition
please subscribe to the podcast on both
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you can also leave us up to a
five star review if you have questions
for us or comments or suggestions about
guests you'd like me to include on the
podcast please put those in the comments
section on YouTube I do read all the
comments in addition please check out
the sponsors mentioned at the beginning
and throughout today's episode that's
the best way to support this podcast on
the huberman Lab podcast we often
discuss supplements while supplements
aren't necessary for everybody many
people derive tremendous benefit from
them for things like enhancing the
quality and duration of sleep for
enhancing focus and for hormone support
the huberman Lab podcast is proud to
announce that we've partnered with
momentous supplements we've done that
for several reasons first of all
momentous supplements are of the very
highest quality second of all they
mainly focus on single ingredient
formulations which is absolutely key if
you want to develop a supplement regimen
that's most biologically and cost
effective it for instance allows you to
alternate dosages across days to change
the dosages of individual ingredients so
on and so forth in addition momentous
supplements ship internationally which
we know is important because many of you
reside outside of the United States if
you'd like to see the supplements
discussed on the huberman Lab podcast
please go to live momentous spelled ous
so that's livemomentis.com huberman you
can get a 20 discount on any of those
supplements again it's livemomentis.com
huberman the huberman Lab podcast has a
zero cost newsletter that includes
summaries of podcast episodes and
toolkits so checklists of actionable
tools that you can use for all aspects
of mental health physical health and
performance you can access this
completely zero cost by going to
hubermanlab.com go to the menu and
scroll down to newsletter just put in
your email we do not share your email
with anybody and you'll get our monthly
newsletter and there are also some
examples of previous newsletters the
also there at hubermanlab.com if you're
not already following me on social media
it is huberman lab on all platforms
Instagram Twitter Facebook and Linkedin
and at all of those places I cover
science and science related tools some
of which overlap with the content of the
uberman Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the Hebron Lab podcast
content again that's huberman lab on all
social media platforms thank you again
for joining me for today's discussion
with Dr Gina Poe all about sleep and its
relationship to mental health physical
health and performance and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
[Music]